Death of the Druids
Our afterword consists of an account of the terrible massacre of the Druids in the 5th century A.D.
The account of the terrible and unprovoked massacre of the Druids by the Saxons which follows is no fiction. It is a real, historical event which we described briefly in our article on Stonehenge published in September 2017. We now relate the whole of the dreadful calamity that befell the Druid Order near Stonehenge on 1st May 472 A.D. Although the Druids continued to disseminate their wisdom, advise Kings, Princes and Rulers, and instruct the youth of the nation in morality, virtue and goodness, the murder of the flower of the Order sounded the final death knell of Druid supremacy in Britain.

Already harried by the Romans for centuries, as we discussed in our previous article on these guardians of Divine Wisdom, the few remaining Druids and their pupils retreated ever further into the wild and inaccessible places until, by the 7th century, the Order was all but extinct in the British Isles. Thereafter, only the offices of Bard and Seer, stripped of much of their occult significance and purpose, survived in a few scattered communities in Wales, until these too died out in the 13th century.

The account of the massacre that follows has been taken from a variety of historical sources, primarily, the Gododdin of Aneurin, the Historia Brittonum, the Historia regum Britanniæ by Geoffrey of Monmouth, and The Mythology and Rites of the British Druids by Edward Davies.

Druid Massacre
When Hengist and his Saxons approached the British coast, after the death of Vortimer in 470, they found that the inhabitants, under the command of Vortigern, were fully determined to oppose their landing in Kent. Upon this occasion, the Saxon chief had recourse to an expedient, suggested by his wily and fertile imagination, as well as from a knowledge of the people with whom he had to deal. In this artifice, the weakness or the treachery of Vortigern was employed. Hengist sent messages to Vortigern assuring him that his purpose in coming into Britain was not to offer any violence to the kingdom or his person, but only to vigorously oppose his son Vortimer, whom he cunningly pretended he thought was still alive.

Hengist further proposed that an interview should take place between them, and that each of the chiefs should meet at the place appointed, attended by the most eminent of his companions in arms. In order to banish every idea of hostile intention, the wily Saxon warlord artfully suggested that both parties should come unarmed to the meeting. The proposal was agreed to by the king; the time of the meeting was fixed for the May following; and the place appointed for the interview was at Stonehenge, upon Salisbury Plain.

In the meantime, Hengist having assembled his chieftains, explained his design, that under the pretence of meeting the Britons for the purpose of peace, and to establish a lasting alliance, he intended to murder the chiefs who should attend Vortigern to the interview; so that by striking so decisive a blow, he might prevent any future resistance. At the same time he gave orders that all his companions should conceal knives in their sleeves; that when the signal was given, each of them should instantly stab the person who sat next to him; and he closed his infernal order, by requiring them to behave like men, and to show no mercy to any person, but to the king alone.

Despite the many proofs the Saxons had given of their perfidy over the years they had been raiding the country, the Britons, with a degree of credulity peculiar to themselves, fell into the trap, and came unarmed to the place of the interview. Hengist contrived to place his followers among those of his hosts, alternately at the tables, under the pretence of confidence and of friendly intercourse with each other. When the festivities were at their height, and probably in the unguarded moments of intoxication, Hengist gave the sign agreed on—'take your Seaxes'—short daggers favoured by the Saxons.

Whereupon, every Saxon drew out his knife, and plunged it into the bosom of the person who sat next to him. More than three hundred of the British nobility, the most eminent for their talents, in the council or in the field, perished in this bloody massacre. Vortigern was spared in the general carnage, though detained a prisoner by Hengist; probably as a ruse to disguise the subsequent treachery of the British prince who, in order to obtain his liberty entered into an agreement with the Saxon chief to assign the counties of Norfolk and Sussex to him, as well as confirming him in the retention of the former territories he had taken possession of.

How familiar all this sounds today; secret 'deals' negotiated behind closed doors, duplicity, betrayal and base treachery, and how little has changed in the fifteen centuries which have elapsed since these infamous deeds were enacted! This adventure did not end well for Hengist as we shall see later on. In addition to the massacre itself, many old writers add the exploits of Eidiol, or Eidol, a British prince, who had the good fortune to escape the slaughter of his fellow nobles.

English antiquaries, who also call him Eldol, or Edol, say he was the Earl of Gloucester, in the year 461. We are told he killed an incredible number of Saxons on the day of the massacre armed only with a quick-beam truncheon. The Welsh chronicles limit the number he slew to seventy men, but even this seems somewhat of an exaggeration given that a modern 'Rambo,' armed to the teeth with contemporary weapons, would have difficulty managing to dispose of quite so many!

Be that as it may, these same annalists, finding that Eidiol was both a temporal prince and a bishop, have thought proper to give us two brothers of that name, styling one of them Earl, and the other Bishop of Gloucester. Edward Davies says this must be a mistake; we agree. It is more likely that the two characters were united in one person, and that this person was probably no other than Emrys, or Ambrosius, who immediately after the massacre was elevated to the British throne.

The very same actions are ascribed to Eidiol and to Emrys, such as burying the British nobles, erecting their monument at Ambresbury, taking Hengist prisoner at Caer Gynan, or Conisbrough (near modern Doncaster), and causing him to be beheaded outside the walls of the castle. If Eidiol was not Ambrosius, then he must have been a prominent counsellor of that prince, to whom his actions were later ascribed. Whatever the truth of Eidiol's identity, it is highly improbable that this massacre, so memorable in the history of England, should be left unmentioned by the Bards of the sixth century.

Their lamentations upon the woeful subject are frequent and pathetic. We will quote just one account of what they had to say about it so as to provide our readers with as complete a picture of the massacre and its aftermath as possible. What follows is our own free and personal translation of a poem by Cuhelyn, the son of Caw, composed about the middle of the sixth century, that is, some hundred years after the events related above. The explanations in square parenthesis are ours.

druids massacre
The Song of Cuhelyn
Black was the sullen wrath of the treacherous wolf, whose only love was the law of steel, and the sword his means of ruling. Eidiol, the just, the magnanimous, distinguished for his wisdom and courage, was presiding over the Circle. But the malicious warlord [Hengist], pretending friendship for the Britons, made now a false alliance, issuing a proclamation, inviting equal numbers to a festive conference at the Banquet of Mead and Fellowship.

And now the mead and wine are passed round by the Knight of the Inclosure, at the appointed place, the Precinct of Iôr, in the fair quadrangular area of the Great Sanctuary of the Domain [Stonehenge]. And the illustrious Bard praised the false pretender—to indulge him whose only virtue lay in the rushing of spears against the unprotected, he, the grim warrior, supreme in unbridled wrath.

So the Chief sang a song of praises to him—the traitor—in the munificent panegyric of the heroic tongue [ancient British]. But only death was the reward for the Chief of Song, he, the magnificent and utterly wise.

The death-reaping blades of the savage Saxons confounded the honied strain of Bardic praise with the gratification of fury. For the breast intent upon violence does rage like the drunken wave of the sea, that tumbles over the strand.

It overwhelms the pleasant strain, the flower of the Circle, the fair Circle of Anoeth. And the minister of Buddud, he who sings the masterly but gentle Song of Praise, chanted his music, like a golden hymn, and sang the song of the Battle of true Heroes.

But now rose up the havoc of sudden assault, unprovoked, and the cry of the sudden shriek of death resounded in the air, according to the deceitful purpose of the warlord of mendacious attack and crimson murder—the brutish warlord, who exclaimed, cursing, "I will rush forth," with an execration, "I will conquer, and bind the Sovereign of the Bards!

"Like the sudden bursting of a dreadful gale, blow ye up, my brave men, the conflagration of war against the youthful heroes and I will reward those who crush the renowned, yea, reward them with the flaming gold of merit; and he who slays on my behalf shall be declared blameless. Here is sufficient recompense and abundance of affluence for us all; and the purpose of my mind is to protect my warriors from all guilt in this enterprise!"

And pre-eminent was the merit of him who strove to save the Sanctuary from the violence of the rapacious foe. And he did preserve the Institute, the Holy Circle, though Nature groaned with indignation before its gentle Goddess. Instead of lamentations, may his Soul be gratified with this tribute of Cuhelyn!

asterisks
Every particular in this poem is later on confirmed by Aneurin in his Gododdin, from whom we further learn that the feast was celebrated and the horrible deed done, in a temporary building near unto Stonehenge Cathedral, and that this building stood upon the Ystre, or Cursus, into which one of the avenues leads from the great temple. Ancient historians inform us that this Cursus was half a mile north of Stonehenge, two miles long and enclosed by two ditches, which were three hundred and fifty feet apart.

Here was the Precinct of Iôr, the 'fair quadrangular area of the Great Sanctuary of the Domain,' mentioned in the poem. Iôr is a name sometimes applied to the Supreme Being, but borrowed from British Mythology, where it seems to have meant The Sun—moving within his orbit, or circle. Davies tells us that Iôr is closely allied to Horus of Egypt, and like Osiris, he was often represented as the Sun itself. Once again, we see the clear links between the Druids of Britain and the Sages of Egypt which point to the common source of their great wisdom—Atlantis.

The absence of the name Hengist from the poem is accounted for by the fact that the Bards seldom mentioned their heroes by name, but instead identified them by an epithet well-known at the time in question. Aneurin in his Gododdin calls Hengist "the leader of the sea-drifted wolves."

The word 'Anoeth' mentioned by Cuhelyn is found in several Welsh Triads and has been variously defined as signifying something 'wonderful', 'deep,' and 'difficult.' This may well be an Atlantean synonym for the Mysteries over which the Druids presided and disseminated. We simply cannot get away from these facts, showing once again that all these things link up and point to the sunken Continent.

'Buddud' is too close to 'Budh,' 'Budha,' 'Buddha' and its cognates to be a coincidence. The word refers both to the planet Mercury (Budh) in Sanskrit and wisdom, that is, divine knowledge. Given that Mercury is also the Messenger of God and identified with Hermes, the appellation 'Minister of Buddud' used in the poem is clearly a synonym for the Druid Hierophant so cruelly slain by Hengist and his rapacious rabble of murderers.

It is recorded that after the massacre of the nobles, the Saxons attacked the great Temple itself, and there was a great battle between the Saxons and the Bards who defended the Sanctuary from the ruthless traitors. Another reason why the name Hengist is not mentioned by the Bards is that this name must be relegated to British Mythology. It is generally accepted nowadays that Hengist means horse, just as Horsa means mare.

Harold Bayley in his essay Archaic England points out that the White Horse and White Mare were indigenous to England long before the times of the Saxon Hengist and Horsa, but that when the Saxons came to England, or Britain, the worship of the horse was revived, for the horse was the emblem of Hanover, and in Hanover, cream coloured horses were reserved for the use of royalty alone.

The Gododdin records that the great Temple of Stonehenge was richly furnished and decorated in the times of the massacre. It was probably the sacred treasures of gold and jewels, as much as the opportunity to strike a fatal blow against the British that motivated Hengist and his conspirators to mount their bloody attack.

Thanks to the heroism of Eidiol and no doubt the other survivors of the massacre, Hengist did not succeed in plundering the temple and retired in great haste to the fortress of Caer Gynan, or Conisbrough mentioned earlier. A few days later he is said to have taken the field against the Britons, but was soundly defeated, his army destroyed, and he himself taken prisoner and beheaded.

His beautiful daughter, Rowena, was given to Vortigern in marriage as a reward for his treachery. There are many different versions of her name more in keeping with her Saxon origins, such as Renwein, Rouwein and Hrotwyn. By all accounts she was something of a femme fatale but in the end she too was slain in revenge for the killing of the famous Bard at the feast.

Here our afterword concludes, and with it the curtain falls on one of the most tragic of all the dramas that have ever been enacted upon the bloody soil of Britain. For much more than lives were lost on that momentous day in May more than 1,500 years ago. Wisdom and Goodness returned to Heaven and folly, greed and villainy took her place and have reigned in prideful majesty ever since.