Defying gravity
In this afterword to our article we consider the phenomena of levitation and anti-gravity
The gravity-defying phenomena of levitation has rarely been better explained than in the preface to Isis Unveiled by H. P. Blavatsky.

"A symbolical explanation of aethrobacy is given in an old Syriac manuscript which was translated in the fifteenth century by one Malchus, an alchemist. In connection with the case of Simon Magus, one passage reads thus: Simon, laying his face upon the ground, whispered in her ear, 'O mother Earth, give me, I pray thee, some of thy breath; and I will give thee mine; let me loose, O mother, that I may carry thy words to the stars, and I will return faithfully to thee after a while.' And the Earth strengthening her status, none to her detriment, sent her genius to breathe of her breath on Simon, while he breathed on her; and the stars rejoiced to be visited by the mighty One."

The meaning of the enigmatical passage Blavatsky quotes has been cloaked in allegory and symbolism in the time honoured manner employed by all genuine alchemists and mystics. Before we try to discover what the writer was really referring to we should explain that aethrobacy (from the Greek 'Aithrobates') is the archaic term for levitation which means 'walking or being lifted in the air.'

Madame Blavatsky goes on to tell us that this faculty may be either conscious or unconscious; if conscious it is Magic, if unconscious it is either a disease or a power which requires a few words of elucidation. Let us begin by reminding you of the recognized electro-chemical principle that bodies similarly electrified repel each other, while those differently electrified attract one another; a fact that anyone may demonstrate to their complete satisfaction with a simple horseshoe magnet. Blavatsky continues:

"The earth is a magnetic body; in fact, as some scientists have found, it is one vast magnet, as Paracelsus affirmed some 300 years ago. It is charged with one form of electricity—let us call it positive—which it evolves continuously by spontaneous action, in its interior or centre of motion. Human bodies, in common with all other forms of matter, are charged with the opposite form of electricity—negative. That is to say, organic or inorganic bodies, if left to themselves will constantly and involuntarily charge themselves with, and evolve the form of electricity opposed to that of the earth itself. Now, what is weight? Simply the attraction of the earth."

How can we get rid of this attraction? According to the electrical law just stated, there is an attraction between our planet and the organisms upon it, which holds them upon the surface of the ground. Occult Science teaches that the condition of our physical systems is largely dependent upon the action of our will. If well-regulated, it can produce seeming 'miracles' and we are at once in the domain of both Alchemy and Magic. Among the changes these sciences can bring about is an alteration in electrical polarity from negative to positive.

A person's relations with the earth-magnet would then become repellent, and so-called 'gravity' would cease to exist for them. It would then be as natural for them to rush into the air until the repellent force had exhausted itself, as, before, it had been for them to remain upon the ground. The altitude of their levitation would be measured by their ability, greater or less, to charge their body with positive electricity. Once such supernormal, but not supernatural, control over the physical forces of attraction and repulsion had been obtained, alteration of altitude would be as easy as breathing.

We mentioned earlier that Madame Blavatsky stated that levitation could also be caused by some disorder. This is what she had to say: "The study of nervous diseases has established that even in ordinary somnambulism [sleepwalking], as well as in hypnotised subjects, the weight of the body seems to be diminished. In the 19th century Professor Perty mentioned a somnambulist by the name of Koehler, who, when in water, could not sink, but floated. The Seeress of Prevorst rose to the surface of her bath and could not be kept seated in it. There is the case of Anna Fleisher, who, being subject to epileptic fits, was often seen to rise in the air; and was once, in the presence of two trustworthy witnesses (two deans) and others, raised seven feet from her bed in a horizontal position.

"The similar case of Margaret Rule is cited by Upham in his History of Salem Witchcraft. Professor Perty also stated that in ecstatic subjects the rising in the air occurs much more frequently than with somnambulists. We are so accustomed to consider gravitation as being a something absolute and unalterable, that the idea of a complete or partial rising in opposition to it seems inadmissible; nevertheless, there are phenomena in which, by means of material forces, gravitation is overcome. In several diseases—as, for instance, nervous fever—the weight of the human body seems to be increased, but in all ecstatic conditions to be diminished. And there may, likewise, be other forces than material ones which can counteract this power."

In these examples we see the same electrical laws at work as those which allowed Simon Magus to fly through the air like a bird. Were our modern physicians equipped with diagnostic tools that could measure electrical polarity they would find that such patients are strongly charged with positive electricity. So far as we are aware no such tools yet exist, but may be discovered in the future.

The annals of 19th-century spiritualism are filled with references to human levitation, as well as tables, chairs and other objects gaining or losing weight without intervention. Vera Petrovna Zhelikhovskaya—Blavatsky's sister—relates an example of this in her letters. The incident in question took place at the home of their mutual friends, the Yakhontovs. Blavatsky was telling her brother Leonid and her father Peter that is was possible for certain persons to make light objects so heavy it was impossible to lift them; and others which were naturally heavy as light as a feather. Vera takes up the narrative:

"And you mean to say that you can do it?" asked her brother.
"Mediums can, and I have done it occasionally; though I cannot always answer for its success," coolly replied Mme. Blavatsky.

"But would you try?" asked somebody in the room; and immediately all joined in requesting her to do so.

"I will try," she said, "but I beg of you to remember that I promise nothing. I will simply fix this chess table. He who wants to make the experiment, let him lift it now, and then try again after I shall have fixed it."

"Do you mean to say that you will not touch the table at all?" asked her father.
"Why should I touch it?" answered Mme. Blavatsky with a quiet smile.

Upon hearing the extraordinary assertion, one of the young men went determinedly to the small chess table and lifted it up as though it were a feather. "All right," said Mme. Blavatsky. "Now kindly leave it alone and stand back!"

All, holding their breath, anxiously watched for what Madame Blavatsky would do next. She apparently, however, did nothing at all. She merely fixed her large blue eyes upon the chess table, and kept looking at it with an intense gaze. Then without removing her gaze, she silently, with a motion of her hand, invited the same young man to remove it. He approached, and grasped the table by its leg with great assurance. The table could not be moved! He then seized it with both his hands. The table stood as though screwed to the floor. He grew red with the effort, but all in vain!

The young man, looking very much confused, slowly said, "Well, this is a good joke!"
"Indeed, it is a good one!" echoed her brother Leonid. A suspicion had crossed his mind that the young visitor was acting in secret confederacy with his sister. "May I also try?" he suddenly asked her.
"Please do, my dear," was the laughing response.

Her brother upon this, approached, smiling, and seized the table by its leg. But the smile instantly vanished, to give place to an expression of mute amazement. He gave it a tremendous kick, but the little table did not even budge. Applying to its surface his powerful chest he entirely enclosed it. "How strange!" he said, with a wild expression of astonishment. Addressing him with her usual careless laugh, Mme. Blavatsky said, "Try and lift it now." Pulling it upward by a leg, Leonid nearly dislocated his arm. It lifted like a feather!"

Here ends Vera Zhelikhovskaya's extraordinary account of the power of the human will to overcome so-called 'gravity.' Many mediums could and did produce the same phenomena unconsciously with the aid of so-called 'spirits' which H. P. Blavatsky accomplished consciously by manipulating the Law of Attraction and Repulsion.

The 19th century medium Daniel Dunglas Home (1833-1886) is perhaps the most famous of these mediums. His first recorded levitation took place at a séance in August 1852. Later he was able to levitate at will, and believed he was lifted up by the 'spirits' he could see. In reality these were the elementals described in Vision Five of The Golden Star on spiritualism.

The English physicist and psychic investigator Sir William Crookes (1832-1919) saw Home levitate on several occasions and verified that there was no trickery involved. On one occasion, Crookes' wife, who was sitting beside Home, was raised off the ground in her chair.

Readers may be surprised to learn that levitation remains one of the criteria recognised by the Catholic Church as indicative of demonic possession. In 1906 a 16-year-old schoolgirl from South Africa, Clara Germana Cele, who the local priest believed was possessed by devils, levitated up to five feet off the ground, sometimes vertically and sometimes horizontally. However, she fell to the ground when she was sprinkled with holy water! If you believe that part of this tale then pigs really can fly—unless, of course, they are sprinkled with holy water by a devout Catholic priest!

Anti-gravity
Many experiments conducted during the last century have established a clear connection between electromagnetism and gravity. The American physicist Erwin Saxl (1904-1981) found that when a torsion pendulum was positively charged, it took longer to swing through its arc than when it was negatively charged. French physicist Maurice Allais (1911-2010) conducted several experiments in 1953 to investigate the action of a magnetic field on the motion of a glass pendulum oscillating inside a solenoid, and concluded that there was a connection between electromagnetism and gravity.

In 1970's American physicist Bruce DePalma (1935-1997) conducted numerous experiments showing that rotation and rotating magnetic fields can have anomalous gravitational and inertial effects. A more controversial experimenter is John R. R. Searl, born in Wantage in Berkshire in 1932. When he was just 17 and newly apprenticed as an electrical technician, he discovered that a small voltage was induced in spinning metal objects. The negative charge was on the outside and the positive charge was around the centre of rotation. He reasoned that free electrons were thrown out by centrifugal force, leaving a positive charge in the centre.

In 1952 he constructed a generator based on this principle which lifted off the ground, and while still accelerating, rose to a height of about 50 feet. It reportedly caused local radio receivers to go on of their own accord. Searl, now nearly ninety, claims that he and his colleagues subsequently built over 50 versions of what has come to be known as his 'levity disc.'

He also claims to have been persecuted by the authorities, resulting in wrongful imprisonment and the destruction of most of his work. This has led orthodox scientists to dismiss him as a delusional fraudster. Yet, subsequent research by many independent scientists from around the world suggests that the electromagnetic effect he discovered is genuine.

In the late 1990's two Russian scientists, Vladimir. V. Roschin and Sergey M. Godin, carried out an experiment with a Searl-type generator and observed a 35% weight reduction, anomalous magnetic-field effects, and a fall in temperature. They concluded that physics cannot explain these results. In 2002, a Canadian physicist, Dr Paulo Correa assisted by his wife Alexandra demonstrated that gravity can be controlled by electric means. In one experiment, a piece of gold leaf weighing 43mg was suspended from the arm of a wooden beam connected to a sensitive electronic balance and reduced in weight by 70%.

Unless we wish to dismiss all such experiments as hoaxes and the many hundreds of scientists around the world seriously investigating so-called 'anti-gravity' effects and devices as fraudsters, it is not unreasonable to conclude that gravity, as we showed in our article at left, is not what science currently thinks it is, nor does it operate in the manner predicted by the so-called 'laws' of physics.

 