Description of the afterlife

We have taken for our peroration to this article a most unusual near-death experience (NDE) of one Drithelm (or Dryhthelm as he is also known), who flourished in the 7th Century, as related by the Venerable Bede in his Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation.
What distinguishes this account from contemporary NDEs are the absolutely correct descriptions the subject gives of the actual conditions to be found in certain parts of the astral world; descriptions which are absent from most modern records of similar experiences. Moreover, Drithelm's vision is in complete accord with our own personal experiences, as well as that of the true Seers throughout history in every part of the world.
The Vision of Drithelm
Taken from the 1723 edition of the Venerable Bede's Ecclesiastical History.

At this time a memorable Miracle, and like to those of former Days, was wrought in Britain; for to awake the Living from the Death of the Soul, a certain Person, who had been some time dead, rose again to the Life of the Body, and related many remarkable things he had seen; some of which I have thought fit here briefly to take notice of. There was a master of a family in that Country of the Northumbrians which is called Cuningham, who led a religious life with all that belonged to him.

He falling sick, and his distemper daily increasing, being brought to extremity, died in the beginning of the night; but coming to Life again in the morning early, and sitting up on a sudden, all those that sate about the body weeping, fled away in a great fright, only his wife, who loved him best, though in a great consternation and trembling, stayed. He comforting her, said, "Fear not, for I am now truly risen from Death, and permitted again to live among Men. However, I am not to live hereafter as I was wont, but from hence forward after a very different manner."

Then rising immediately, he repaired to the oratory of the little town, and continuing in prayer till day, immediately divided all his substance into three parts; one whereof he gave to his wife, another to his children, and the third, belonging to himself, he instantly distributed among the poor. Not long after, he repaired to the monastery of Melrose, which is almost enclosed by the winding of the river Tweed, and having been shorn, went into a private dwelling, which the Abbot had provided, where he continued till the day of his death, in such extraordinary contrition of Mind and Body, that though his tongue had been silent, his life declared that he had seen many things either to be dreaded or coveted, which others knew nothing of.

Thus he related what he had seen. "He that led me had a shining countenance and a bright garment, and we went on silently, as I thought, towards the north-east. Walking on, we came to a vale of great breadth and depth, but of infinite length; on the left it appeared full of dreadful flames, the other side was no less horrid for violent hail and cold snow flying in all directions; both places were full of men's souls, which seemed by turns to be tossed from one side to the other, as it were by a violent storm; for when the wretches could no longer endure the excess of the immense heat, they leaped into the middle of the cutting cold; and finding no rest there, they leaped back again into the middle of the unquenchable flames.

"Now whereas an innumerable multitude of deformed spirits were thus alternately tormented far and near, as far as could be seen, without any intermission, I began to think that this perhaps might be hell, of whose intolerable flames I had often heard talk. My Guide, who went before me, answered to my thought, saying, 'Do not believe so, for this is not the hell you imagine.'

"When he had conducted me, much frightened with that horrid spectacle, by degrees, to the farther end, on a sudden I saw the place begin to grow dusk and filled with darkness. When I came into it, the darkness, by degrees, grew so thick, that I could see nothing besides it and the shape and garment of him that led me. As we went on through the shades of night, on a sudden there appeared before us frequent globes of black flames, rising as it were out of a great pit, and falling back again into the same. When I had been conducted thither, my Leader suddenly vanished, and left me alone in the midst of darkness and this horrid vision, whilst those same globes of fire, without intermission, at one time flew up and at another fell back into the bottom of the abyss; and I observed that all the flames, as they ascended, were full of human souls, which, like sparks flying up with smoke, were sometimes thrown on high, and again, when the vapour of the fire ceased, dropt down again into the Depth. Besides an insufferable stench gushing out with those vapours, filled all those dark places.

"Having stood there a long time in much dread, as not knowing what to do, which way to turn me, or what end I might expect, on a sudden I heard behind me the noise of a most hideous and wretched lamentation, and at the same time a loud laughing, as of a rude multitude insulting captured enemies. When that noise, growing plainer, came up to me, I observed a gang of evil spirits dragging the grieving and lamenting Souls of Men into the midst of that darkness, whilst they themselves laughed and rejoiced. Among those men, as I could discern, there was one shorn like a Clergyman, a certain Layman, and a Woman. The evil spirits that dragged them went down into the midst of the burning pit; and as they went down deeper, I could no longer distinguish between the lamentation of the men and the laughing of the devils, yet I still had a confused sound in my ears.

"In the meantime, some of the dark spirits ascended from that flaming abyss, and running forward, beset me and perplexed me, with glaring eyes and exhaling stinking fire from their mouths and nostrils; and threatened to lay hold on me with burning tongs, which they had in their hands, yet they durst not touch me, though they frightened me. Being thus on all sides enclosed with enemies and darkness, and looking about every way, to see whether any assistance would some way come to deliver me, there appeared behind me, on the way that I came, as it were, the Brightness of a Star shining amidst the darkness; the which increasing by degrees, and hasting towards me, when it drew near, all those evil spirits that sought to snatch me away with their tongs, were dispersed and fled.

"He, whose approach put them to flight, was the same that had led me before; who, then turning towards the right, began to lead me, as it were, towards the south-east, and having soon brought me out of the darkness, conducted me into the Air of a serene Light. When he led me in the open Light, I saw a vast great wall before us, the length whereof every way, and the height seemed to be altogether boundless. I began to wonder why we went up to the wall, as seeing no door, window, or ascent in it.

"When we came to the wall, we were presently, I know not by what means, on the top of it, and within it was a vast and delightful Field, so full of fragrant flowers that the odour of its delightful sweetness immediately dispelled the stink of the dark furnace, which had pierced me through and through. So great was the light in this place, that it seemed to exceed the brightness of the day, or the sun in its meridian height. In this field were innumerable assemblies of men in white, and many companies seated together rejoicing. As he led me through the midst of those happy inhabitants, I began to think that this might perhaps be the Kingdom of Heaven, of which I had often heard much. He answered to my thought, saying, 'This is not the Kingdom of Heaven, as you imagine.'

"Going on, and having passed those mansions of Blessed Souls, I discovered before me a much more beautiful Light, and in it heard most sweet voices of singers, and so wonderful a fragrancy proceeded from the place, that the other which I had before thought most delicious, then seemed to me but very indifferent; even as that extraordinary brightness of the flowery field, compared with this, appeared little and inconsiderable. When I began to hope we should enter that delightful place, my guide on a sudden stood still; and then turning back, he led me back the same way we came.

"When we returned to those joyful mansions of the souls in white, he said to me, 'Do you know what all these things you have seen are?' I answered. I did not; and then he replied, 'That vale you saw so dreadful for consuming flames and cutting cold, is the place in which the souls of those are tried and punished, who, delaying to confess and amend their crimes, at length have recourse to repentance at the point of death, and so depart this life; but nevertheless because they, even at their death, confessed and repented, they shall all be received into the Kingdom of Heaven at the day of judgment; but many are relieved before the day of judgment, by the prayers, alms, and fasting, of the living, and more especially by masses. That fiery and stinking pit, which you saw, is the mouth of Hell, into which whosoever falls shall never be delivered to all eternity. This flowery place, in which you see these most beautiful young people, so bright and merry, is that into which the souls of those are received who depart the body in good works, but who are not so perfect as to deserve to be immediately admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven; yet they shall all, at the day of judgment, see Christ, and partake of the joys of his Kingdom; For whosoever are perfect in thought, word and deed, as soon is they depart the body, immediately enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; in the neighbourhood whereof that place is, where you heard the sound of sweet singing, with the fragrant odour and brightness of Light.

'As for you, who are now to return to your Body, and live among men again, if you will endeavour nicely to examine your actions, and direct your speech and behaviour in righteousness and simplicity, you shall, after death, have a place or residence among these joyful troops of blessed souls; for when I left you for a while, it was to know how you were to be disposed of.' When he had said this to me, I much abhorred returning to my body, being delighted with the sweetness and beauty of the place I beheld, and with the company of those I saw in it. However, I durst not ask him any questions; but in the meantime, on a sudden, I found myself alive among men."

That Man of God would not relate these and other things he had seen to slothful persons and such as lived negligently; but only to those who, being terrified with the dread of torments, or delighted with the hopes of Heavenly joys, would make use of his words to advance in piety.

AFTERWORD
Here ends this account of what Drithelm saw and heard during the time his Higher Self was freed from his body. We have excised the last few paragraphs from the Venerable Bede's record, as they add nothing of value to the tale. Drithelm's vision is reminiscent of Dante's Inferno in many ways, and like the Italian Poet, he visits several distinct realms or planes within the astral world, the significance of which will not be lost on some readers.