Dying to live
Science believes consciousness ceases with the death of the body. So it should come as no surprise that when people find themselves still in a body, they refuse to believe they're dead! This was the situation the subject of our afterword found himself in.
We have taken his story from Far Memory—the autobiography of Joan Grant. From an early age Joan saw things others didn't. This often got her into trouble with adults who were far too 'down to earth' to believe in ghosts. Yet she saw them everywhere, waking and sleeping, generally when she least wanted or expected to.

She is not unique in her ability to see the so-called 'dead,' help convince them that they have died, and find their proper place in that part of the Astral World their state of evolution and spiritual attainments entitle them to.

You may be surprised just how many people—sometimes consciously, but more often unconsciously—do this kind of work, both when they are awake and during so-called 'dreams'. Here then, is the remarkable account of Joan Grant's encounter with the dead.

A contemporary dream I will describe in detail because it is typical of many others, in which the "I" alternates between the experience of someone else with whom I was briefly in such close contact that his experience felt like my own, and the "I" that was an extension of the ordinary Joan.

I am a sailor, about thirty years old, on a large liner. I am afraid because there is fire in the ship, but I do not realise I am in any real danger until the smoke drives me back along a narrow passage and I have to climb out of a cabin window because I cannot reach the stairs. I run along the deck but am prevented from going any farther by clouds of heavy black smoke. I look down into the sea where several men are struggling in the fire-lit water. Dare I jump? No, I can't swim. I shall be drowned if I jump. Perhaps if I run towards the bows I shall be able to climb down to a lower deck. Paint is bubbling up into great blisters which burst with a small, sharp noise I can hear above the noise of the fire and the sea...My feet are hurting because of the heat of the deck. I must jump. I must. It is better to drown than to be burned.

I clamber over the bulwark, stand on it for an agonisingly long time, and then, when a gust of heat singes my back, throw myself forwards, trying to keep my feet together as I fall. The sea knocks the breath out of me. I try to swim but I am too heavy, too heavy. The water is crushing my ribs. A great hand is squeezing them. Why does the giant want to kill me?

He has let go! I am buoyant as a cork. I can swim! It is very easy to swim. Swim fast, faster! Get away from the burning ship before she heels over. It is almost ridiculously easy to swim. Why did I never realise I could swim so well? I swim very well. I have swum a long way and yet I am not tired. I feel stronger with every stroke I make. . . A wave lifts me and I see I am very close to an island. The sun is making the water glitter but I can see the palm trees on the island. The water is kind and smooth and warm. . .

Then I am no longer the sailor. I am Joan, standing on a shelving beach of white sand, watching a man splashing towards me through the shallows. He is wringing water from his clothes when he sees me. "Good morning, Miss," he says politely. "Extraordinary what you can do when you're up against it! Never done more than paddle in my life, and there I was swimming like a ruddy champ, overarm and all. Not that I wasn't glad to see this island. Belongs to you, Miss?"

I tell him that I am only staying here for a little while and that a yacht will come to pick us up before sunset. Where would he like the yacht to take him? "My ship was bound for Cherbourg, but I'd rather go to Bordeaux—if it's all the same to you and no trouble."

I ask if he is hungry. I have food, plenty of food and wine too if he would like it. He says he would prefer a coconut. "Very partial to green nuts I am, took a fancy to them when I was deckhand on a cargo-boat plying to the West Indies. I'm on a liner now—very posh job she is. . . "He pauses, beginning to look anxious so I quickly change the direction of his thoughts by asking him to show me how to open a coconut. Then I say casually, "Have you noticed that you're dead?"

"Dead? Me, Miss? Don't talk so barmy!" He picks up a pebble and throws it into the sea, where it makes a most realistic splash. Then he kicks the sand with his bare foot. "Dead men can't wriggle their toes. I've seen corpses in my time, and their feet were as stiff as a plank."

"Was there a fire in your ship?"
"Yes," he reluctantly concedes. "But don't let's talk about it. It will be a good story to tell over a bottle of wine when I get home—not yet though, it's a bit too close for comfort if you see what I mean."

"How fast can you swim?"
"You seen me," he says reproachfully. "Matter of ten knots or more I must have been doing."
"No one can swim as fast as that—unless he is dead."
"You been running about in the sun too long without a hat, Miss? Very odd notions sunstroke gives some people. I remember a stoker, proper raving he was, when I was in the West Indies. . ."

I hasten to interrupt him. I have arranged our present environment with some care and it will only confuse the issue if we find ourselves involved in the playback of a bar fight in Martinique. "You are dead," I say briskly, "and now I will prove it to you. Where was your ship when the fire broke out?"
"In the English Channel."
"And are there coral islands like this in those waters?"
That shakes him for a moment. "It must be one of the Scillies. Never been to them, but I've heard tell they grow palm trees there—which is true, for I can see them, ten good ones, with nuts on."

"Can I fly? If I fly will you agree that you drowned?"
"If you can fly—no cheating, mind you—it don't count if you've got an aeroplane tucked away behind them trees—I'll give you best, honest to God I will."

I try to levitate, but so strong is his conviction that I shall stay solidly on the ground that for a moment nothing happens. Then I make an extra effort and rise into the air, do a few fancy swoops, and land neatly beside him. Then he laughs, gusts of enormous and complete enjoyment, not at me but at himself.

"All my life I've been frightened of dying, and all it was is this! Never enjoyed myself so much as I have since I drowned. What a joke on my poor auntie who always said I'd fry in hell when I died! If this is hell, give me lots more of it! Where do we go from here?"

"Tell me who you would most like to be with and I will fix your passage," I say, efficient as a travel agent.
"Must they be dead too?"
"Not necessarily. But it would be better as a start. People who are only asleep—like me—are inclined to vanish rather abruptly."
"Well, there was a very nice bloke who was torpedoed in the war. . ."
"Think of him hard," I say quickly. I am beginning to feel misty at the edges and know I am soon going to wake up. I hear a joyous shout of recognition and dimly see two men thumping each other on the back...bottles of red wine on a table, the music of an accordion...

I woke. The telephone was ringing. I pulled the plug out of the wall and scrabbled for my notebook. No, this was too exciting to risk losing any of it. "Leslie, listen!" When I had told him everything I could remember he said, "What was the name of the ship? Try hard. It would be evidence."

"All I can get is 'Atlantic.' I suppose he told me the ship crossed the Atlantic before she entered the Channel—although I don't remember him saying so."
"Why do you think the sailor was French?"

"His ship was on its way to Cherbourg, although I suppose she might only have been calling there on her way to Southampton or somewhere. But he wanted to go to Bordeaux and there was wine, not beer or whisky, in the last glimpse I had of him."
"When you were describing his conversation he talked like a cockney."
"The cockney doesn't signify anything. I've noticed that when I remember a dream-conversation I automatically translate it into the nearest equivalent English. When I was in Scotland I had a Roman dream in which a soldier seemed to speak with a Highland accent—because I'd been listening to Old Robbie the day before."

"Well, I hope it wasn't an English ship," said Leslie, and went downstairs to fetch the morning papers. There was nothing in any of them about a fire at sea. But when we came out of a cinema about tea-time we saw the newspaper placards: FIRE IN CRACK FRENCH LINER. The headline was "L'Atlantique burns in English Channel: Many Dead."

There Joan Grant's remarkable account ends. To save readers looking it up, we can confirm that there was a French liner named L'Atlantique which sank in the English Channel on the morning of 4 January 1933. She was on a voyage from her home port of Bordeaux to Le Havre for dry-docking, with no passengers and only a skeleton crew on board when fire broke out in a cabin. Some of the crew were thrown into the sea when a lifeboat tilted as it was being lowered. Others were trapped in the engine and boiler rooms—Joan's sailor no doubt among them. In all 19 men lost their lives. The 'Leslie' mentioned in the narrative was Joan's second husband, Leslie Grant.

Her account raises two important points which are worthy of emphasis. Many people who die—we almost said 'most'—don't know they're dead. Why should they? As the doctor we quoted in our article said: "We're not taught about dying." If doctors know nothing about dying, priests know even less. Science is adamant that the death of the physical body and brain marks the cessation of consciousness because it believes consciousness cannot be separated from it. In other words, when you're dead, you're dead! If you've been repeatedly told all your life that you are your body and when your body dies, you die with it, when you find yourself in the same body after death it is not surprising that, like the sailor Joan Grant encountered, you are sure you must still be alive.

The second point we wish to emphasize is how happy the sailor was when discovered he was dead. As he told his rescuer: "All my life I've been frightened of dying, and all it was is this!" If you take nothing else away from this article and our afterword, we hope you will take these two truths away with you. If you can make them a part of your thinking death will cease to have any fears for you. You won't need to make war on death or encourage others to do so. You will recognise death as an old and familiar friend who has come to take you home.