Ecclesiasticus unveiled
In this afterword I analyse some verses about wisdom and folly from the book of Ecclesiasticus in the Old Testament Apocrypha
Ecclesiasticus should not be confused with Ecclesiastes. The former is part of the Old Testament Apocrypha whilst the latter is found in the Old Testament between Proverbs and the Song of Solomon. Before we consider the book itself, I would like to say something about the Apocrypha. Biblical scholars and the terminally impatient may skip this part of my afterword without any serious loss!

The Old Testament Apocrypha
Readers unfamiliar with the Bible may be surprised to learn that apocryphal does not mean spurious, mythological or untrue, as the general public is taught to believe. As the authors of this website point out in their review of the Book of Enoch, the word is taken from the Greek apo—'away' and kryptein meaning 'to hide.' In other words a book hidden away from the multitude, because it contained secrets the multitude should not know. It may come as a further surprise to discover that the 1611 King James Version (KJV) of the English Bible contained the OT Apocrypha. What is more, King James threatened anyone who dared to print it without the Apocrypha with heavy fines and a year in jail!

Until 1885 almost every Protestant Bible contained the Apocrypha. It was included in the Coverdale Bible (1534); the Great or Cromwell's Bible (1541); the Tyndale-Matthews Bible (1551); the Protestant Geneva Bible (1560); and the Bishops' Bible. It was never removed from the Catholic Bible and remains part of it to this day. The Coptic, Greek and Russian Orthodox churches also recognise the Apocrypha as canonical scripture.

For over 274 years there were continued attempts to remove the Apocrypha from the Protestant Bible. The reasons for this are legion, but mainly revolved around doctrinal differences between the Catholic and Protestant Churches and questions of 'divine' authorship. In 1647 the Church of England condemned the Apocrypha as "not being of divine inspiration, are no part of the Canon of Scripture; and therefore are of no authority in the Church of God..." (Westminster Confession, 1647). In 1880 the American Bible Society voted to remove the Apocrypha from the KJV. Their wish was granted in 1885 by the then Archbishop of Canterbury.

This has given rise to the almost universal belief that the Apocrypha is spurious, mythological and untrue. Very few members of the clergy who I worked with when I was a minister had read it and even fewer wanted to. Those who had vaguely heard of it dismissed it as a collection of ancient texts irrelevant to the teachings of the modern Church. Others felt that anything the Catholic Church accepted as canonical scripture must be false. Many American ministers were convinced the Apocrypha encouraged immorality, lying, divination, and—horror of horrors—interest in the 'Occult'! Here we have the real reason for the excision of the Apocrypha from the Protestant Bible. The occult wisdom contained in it conflicted with, and in some cases, contradicted, the accepted dogmas of the Church.

Ecclesiasticus
Ecclesiasticus comes under the category of Wisdom Literature; that is a book containing practical and moral rules and exhortations, as well as esoteric truths imparted allegorically which the laity were not permitted to know. It was the inability of the Protestant Church to understand the hidden meaning of the book that was probably a major factor in its exclusion from the KJV Bible in 1885 as well as its rejection by the Jews.

On the other hand, the book was highly regarded by the educated Greeks of Alexandria who were heavily influenced by the ideas of Plato and the teachings of the Greek Mystery Schools. Some modern critics say the book encourages the harsh treatment of slaves (Ecclesiasticus 33:24-28) as well as demeaning women (42:12-14). This may explain why the book was neglected and remains unpopular; both classes of reader are incapable and unwilling to distinguish modern foolishness from ancient Wisdom.

Verses 24 to 28 of chapter 33 talk of servants, not slaves; an important distinction lost on modern critics reared on a diet of political correctness and the fallacy that Jack is as good as his Master. We are all servants; let no one doubt this fact of life. From a president to a porter and a bishop to a baker, we all serve something or someone.

Some servants are slaves though they wear neither yokes nor manacles, yet in their actions and thoughts display all the characteristics of a slave. Any man or woman who allows themselves to be deprived of their God-given freedom of thought and action is a slave, whether they realize it or not. As I write this I am reminded of the millions of muzzled men and women throughout the world who have given up their hard-earned liberty in exchange for the temporary safety promised by mendacious politicians who prey upon their fear, greed and ignorance.

Let us examine these verses further. "Fodder, a wand, and burdens, are for the ass; and bread, correction, and work, for a servant. If thou set thy servant to labour, thou shalt find rest: but if thou let him go idle, he shall seek liberty. A yoke and a collar do bow the neck: so are tortures and torments for an evil servant. Send him to labour, that he be not idle; for idleness teacheth much evil. Set him to work, as is fit for him: if he be not obedient, put on more heavy fetters."

Read aright there is nothing wrong with this advice. Work, even when it is uncongenial or arduous, builds character, self-discipline, confidence and dignity and the opposite applies to idleness. Do we really need to be reminded of the immeasurable harm caused by the well-meaning policies of social welfare which have resulted in families in which no one has worked for two or more generations? What are these feckless idlers if not 'evil servants'?

The wise Frisians, whose laws and customs the authors of this website discuss in their articles on Atlantis, believed that if a man is too lazy to work, then he must be sent out of the country, because, as they say: "the cowardly and lazy are troublesome and ill-disposed, therefore they ought to be got rid of." The Frisians were not alone in recognising the evil of idleness. In Peru before the conquest, it was required that every citizen should provide evidence of how they had earned their living during the previous year. If they were unable to do so they were exiled by the Inca. How wise the ancients were and how very foolish we have become!

Let us now consider verses 12 to 14 of chapter 42 that some critics say 'demean women.' "Behold not every body's beauty, and sit not in the midst of women. For from garments cometh a moth, and from women wickedness. Better is the churlishness of a man than a courteous woman, a woman, I say, which bringeth shame and reproach." On the face of it the criticism seems justified, but is it?

The previous three verses, which the critics do not cite, draw a clear distinction between virtuous and unvirtuous women. Moreover, in emphasizing the duties a father owes to his daughter, they commend the wisdom and care sadly lacking in many of today's parents! I suspect the real objection to these verses is not that they denigrate decent women—which is clearly not the case—but rather that they run counter to the modern notion of moral ambivalence and the denial of good and evil as moral absolutes. To save you looking them up, verses 9 to 11 read:

"The father waketh for the daughter, when no man knoweth; and the care for her taketh away sleep: when she is young, lest she pass away the flower of her age; and being married, lest she should be hated: In her virginity, lest she should be defiled and gotten with child in her father's house; and having an husband, lest she should misbehave herself; and when she is married, lest she should be barren. Keep a sure watch over a shameless daughter, lest she make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies, and a byword in the city, and a reproach among the people, and make thee ashamed before the multitude."

All this is wisdom of the right sort which, if it were followed today, would result in greater happiness, less unwanted children and fewer harmful and abusive relationships. But, as we may read elsewhere in this remarkable book, "He that telleth a tale to a fool speaketh to one in a slumber: when he hath told his tale, he (the fool) will say, What is the matter?" (Ecclesiasticus 22:8). For, according to chapter 21, verse 14 "The inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel, and he will hold no knowledge as long as he liveth."

Ecclesiasticus contains 51 chapters, double the number to be found in the canonical gospels and one more than Genesis, yet, as I said earlier, this sublime book is almost universally unknown and neglected. The word 'fool' and its cognates is mentioned 147 times in the Old Testament. Divided by the 39 books which comprise it, this works out to just under 4 mentions per book. The number of mentions in the New Testament is even less; 42 divided by 27 books amounts to a word density of one and a half per book. Contrast this with Ecclesiasticus in which the word occurs 45 times!

Now it will be clear why I choose to analyse a few verses from this book. I say a 'few', for neither time nor space permit me to do more, much as I would like to and you may wish me to! I may revisit it in a future article, but that is not a promise nor an invitation to the editors to bamboozle me again! [as if we would: Eds.].

Chapter 21—a most significant number for those who have studied real numerology—has many good things to say about fools and foolishness which are of especial interest to the occult scientist. "The inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel, and he will hold no knowledge as long as he liveth" (Ibid., 21:14). The 'inner parts' are a concealed reference to the pineal gland and pituitary body—or so-called 'third eye'—which is one of the means the wise employ to see beyond the illusions of the material world.

"If a skilful man hear a wise word, he will commend it, and add unto it: but as soon as one of no understanding heareth it, it displeaseth him, and he casteth it behind his back. (Ibid., 21:15). This introduces the subject of teaching, a topic continued in chapter 22. Verse 19 contains another hidden reference, this time to the Higher Self or Mind. "Doctrine unto fools is as fetters on the feet, and like manacles on the right hand" (my emphasis).

"Whoso teacheth a fool is as one that glueth a potsherd together, and as he that waketh one from a sound sleep" (Ibid., 22:7). Meaning, after one or possibly two loud snorts of derision, the fool will go back to sleep, having learned nothing during his brief moment of wakefulness. In other words, "he that telleth a tale to a fool speaketh to one in a slumber: when he hath told his tale, he will say, What is the matter?" (ibid., 22:8). How often have I heard this complaint from students during the seminars I used to give on the hidden wisdom in the Bible!

The advice given in verse 13 reinforces the dangers of casting wisdom before fools—to misquote the Bible slightly: "Talk not much with a fool, and go not to him that hath no understanding: beware of him, lest thou have trouble, and thou shalt never be defiled with his fooleries: depart from him, and thou shalt find rest, and never be disquieted with madness."

Lest we forget that Wisdom is accounted a feminine principle throughout the Bible, and rightly so, here is a verse all men might remember with profit: "Forego not a wise and good woman: for her grace is above gold" (Ibid., 7:19). I would like to conclude this afterword with the following good advice: "Blessed is he that shall be exercised in these things; and he that layeth them up in his heart shall become wise" (ibid., 50:28).

 