Einstein and Aether

In our afterword we briefly consider Albert Einstein's ideas about Aether.
Albert Einstein presented his ideas about Aether in an address given at the University of Leiden in The Netherlands in 1920. His topic was "Ether and the Theory of Relativity." His lecture was translated from German into English and published by Methuen & Co. Ltd, London, in 1922, from which we have selected those passages which have a bearing on our theme. The interpolated comments in [square brackets] and concluding remarks are ours.

Outside of physics we know nothing of action at a distance. When we try to connect cause and effect in the experiences which natural objects afford us, it seems at first as if there were no other mutual actions than those of immediate contact, e.g. the communication of motion by impact, push and pull, heating or inducing combustion by means of a flame, etc. It was Newton's theory of gravitation that first assigned a cause for gravity by interpreting it as action at a distance, proceeding from masses.

Newton's theory is probably the greatest stride ever made in the effort towards the causal nexus of natural phenomena. And yet this theory evoked a lively sense of discomfort among Newton's contemporaries, because it seemed to be in conflict with the principle springing from the rest of experience, that there can be reciprocal action only through contact, and not through immediate action at a distance.

[Our regular readers will recall that we alluded to this conflict in our article why matter matters, in which we said: "whilst he (Newton) may not have believed in the Aether of occult science, he did believe in the 'subtle spirit' which mediates attraction and repulsion between bodies. This statement frightened Newton's contemporaries."]

When in the first half of the nineteenth century the far-reaching similarity was revealed which subsists between the properties of light and those of elastic waves in ponderable bodies, the Ether hypothesis found fresh support. It appeared beyond question that light must be interpreted as a vibratory process in an elastic, inert medium filling up universal space. It also seemed to be a necessary consequence of the fact that light is capable of polarisation that this medium, the Ether, must be of the nature of a solid body, because transverse waves are not possible in a fluid, but only in a solid.

[Here Einstein erred by viewing the Aether as a grossly material 'fluid' akin to water, which he expected to conform to the (then) known laws of physics.]

The development of the theory of electricity along the path opened up by Maxwell and Lorentz gave the development of our ideas concerning the Ether quite a peculiar and unexpected turn. For Maxwell himself the Ether indeed still had properties which were purely mechanical, although of a much more complicated kind than the mechanical properties of tangible solid bodies. [This is just what we said above].

But neither Maxwell nor his followers succeeded in elaborating a mechanical model for the Ether which might furnish a satisfactory mechanical interpretation of Maxwell's laws of the electro-magnetic field. [And how could they, given, as we saw in our article, that the Aether of Occult Science is of such a rarefied nature that it is not detectable by any of the then (or present) methods of science? One might as well try to detect 'thought', yet we know it exists or we would not have been able to write this afterword, or you to read it!]

The laws were clear and simple, the mechanical interpretations clumsy and contradictory. [We should say so!] Almost imperceptibly the theoretical physicists adapted themselves to a situation which, from the standpoint of their mechanical programme, was very depressing. Thus the purely mechanical view of nature was gradually abandoned. [By those who posited the concept of the Aether, but not by mainstream science, which still clings doggedly to its mechanistic outlook].

Certainly, from the standpoint of the special theory of relativity, the Ether hypothesis appears at first to be an empty hypothesis. In the equations of the electromagnetic field there occur, in addition to the densities of the electric charge, only the intensities of the field. The career of electromagnetic processes in vacuo appears to be completely determined by these equations, uninfluenced by other physical quantities. The electromagnetic fields appear as ultimate, irreducible realities, and at first it seems superfluous to postulate a homogeneous, isotropic Ether-medium, and to envisage electromagnetic fields as states of this medium.

But on the other hand there is a weighty argument to be adduced in favour of the Ether hypothesis. To deny the Ether is ultimately to assume that empty space has no physical qualities whatever. The fundamental facts of mechanics do not harmonize with this view. For the mechanical behaviour of a corporeal system hovering freely in empty space depends not only on relative positions (distances) and relative velocities, but also on its state of rotation, which physically may be taken as a characteristic not appertaining to the system in itself.

In order to be able to look upon the rotation of the system, at least formally, as something real, Newton objectivises space. Since he classes his absolute space together with real things, for him rotation relative to an absolute space is also something real. Newton might no less well have called his absolute space "Ether"; what is essential is merely that besides observable objects, another thing, which is not perceptible, must be looked upon as real, to enable acceleration or rotation to be looked upon as something real.

[From this it is clear that Einstein couldn't make his mind up whether the Aether existed or not, a dilemma which still occupies scientists today as we saw in our article. The obstacle they all face and will not surmount is the existence of two principles in Nature—Spirit and Matter. We have repeatedly alluded to this in several previous articles so will not labour the point here, though it is an important one if physics is ever to solve the problems it faces.]

Since according to our present conceptions the elementary particles of matter are also, in their essence, nothing else than condensations of the electromagnetic field [or rather of the Aether], our present view of the universe presents two realities which are completely separated from each other conceptually, although connected causally, namely, gravitational Ether and electromagnetic field, or—as they might also be called—space and matter. [Now, if we substitute the word 'Spirit' for space, we see that Einstein was 'going places' as the Americans say, but sadly did not follow this idea to its logical conclusion and so continued to be bound within the narrow confines of the mechanical theories, which then, as now, dominated scientific thinking.]

Of course it would be a great advance if we could succeed in comprehending the gravitational field and the electromagnetic field together as one unified conformation. [This remains the 'Holy Grail' of physicists to this day but is impossible of fulfilment without the inclusion of the Spirit "that giveth life," which science continues to deny. But let the great German physicist have the last word, perhaps we may yet find some further indications of higher thinking in his lecture!]

Recapitulating, we may say that according to the general theory of relativity space is endowed with physical qualities; in this sense, therefore, there exists an Ether. According to the general theory of relativity space without Ether is unthinkable; for in such space there not only would be no propagation of light, but also no possibility of existence for standards of space and time (measuring-rods and clocks), nor therefore any space-time intervals in the physical sense. But this Ether may not be thought of as endowed with the quality characteristic of ponderable media, as consisting of parts which may be tracked through time. The idea of motion may not be applied to it.

einstein
Well, well, well. Who would have thought that Einstein was prepared to consider the existence of Aether as it is understood by Occult scientists! Such, at least, is our understanding of the final words of his address. Note that he tells us: "The idea of motion may not be applied to it (Aether)." In other words it is motionless in itself, but is the cause of motion in all ponderable matter, as we discussed in the final part of our article. In connection with space and time, Einstein's words are not so very different from those of H. P. Blavatsky who, in The Secret Doctrine, tells us: "Time is but the movement of consciousness through and in Space."

Some 20 years after Einstein delivered his address, he declared that the Universe was an orderly space under the directing hand of God. That such a famous scientist should declare that the Universe is regulated by the hand of God in an orderly manner came as a tremendous shock to the materialists of science.

Einstein went on to say: "I cannot believe that God plays dice with the cosmos." Of course not, and He, in all His Divinity and Wisdom could not do so if He wished it, for Occult Science tells us that the Universal Laws bind everything and every one, great and small, and there is no escape from them anyway, nor evasion, though man, in his prideful arrogance may imagine so!