Evolution
In this afterword, we review what material science knows about evolution and the body and consider some of its discoveries and theories, past and present.
Science tells us that on average water makes up 60% of the mass of an adult human body, rising to 75% in infants. The brain and heart—two of the most vital organs in the body—are composed of 73% water, whilst the lungs are about 83% water. Even our very bones, which seem so solid, are 31% water. There is more to this than meets the eye, for as those of you who have read our article on the Magic of Water will recall, the earliest philosophers chose water to represent the primeval substance from which the universe and all that exists within it, first arose. And in the ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, which date from around 2,500 B.C., we may read how Khepera, the Creator, brought our Kosmos into being from the waters of Nu.

In addition to water, the body contains 16% protein, 16% fat, 6% minerals of various kinds and 1% carbohydrate. Our bodies also contain 0.4% salt which, by a strange coincidence, is the same concentration that we find in seawater. If we now look at the elemental composition of the body we find that it is 65% Oxygen, 18% Carbon, 10% Hydrogen and 3% Nitrogen, with the remaining 4% accounted for by other elements. This is interesting, for in Vision 7 of The Golden Star (page 6), we may read that: "The four principal ingredients of physical nature are: Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Oxygen and Carbon." Now, as Science tells us, Carbon is the basis of all organic substances, so it is not surprising that after Oxygen, which we may regard as the 'breath of life' in more ways than one, Carbon is the most predominant element in the human body, as well as that of other animals and life forms.

The Golden Star goes on to tell us: "Oxygen supports combustion, and is the active chemical agent of all organic life; Hydrogen burns in Oxygen and is the most stable of all compounds; it exists largely in all organisms; Nitrogen is an inert gas; it is the vehicle with which oxygen is mixed to adopt it for animal respiration; it enters largely in all organic substances. When these four principles are all together in any organic substance it needs only the addition of the vital spark, the living fire, to ignite the organism, and it can then develop and reproduce itself."

Although it would be stretching a point to suggest that these four material elements are the actual four occult elements of Fire, Air, Water and Earth, there is clearly a correspondence between Fire and Hydrogen; Air and Oxygen; Water and Nitrogen; and Earth and Carbon. May it not also be possible that these familiar terrestrial elements exist in the higher dimensions in a more refined state? And if they do, the correspondence between them and the four Occult elements may be even closer the nearer they approach to the Source of All. This is more than mere guesswork on our part, for as many of you will know, the occult axiom, 'As Above——so below' always applies, material conditions being the reflection of spiritual causes according to the teachings of Occult Science.

Having said all this, we should like to see any scientist take a couple of buckets of water, or even beer or whisky, a pinch of salt and a few chemicals, and construct a living body out of them! It just can't be done, despite the various claims of Science to have 'created' life in the laboratory.

As early as 1932, Dr R. Beutner in his book Physical Chemistry of living Tissues stated that: "Life, therefore, in spite of all its complexity, seems to be no more than one of the innumerable properties of the compounds of carbon." Now this is where Science has always gone wrong, for none of the physical elements are capable of creating life, though they are needed to construct living forms. In 1972, two famous biologists, Gerard J. Tortora and Joseph F. Becker, diluted Beutner's statement to read: "The element carbon, perhaps more than any other, is characteristic of organic matter." This is certainly an improvement, but scientists still will not recognise that there is a higher principle that causes Life to manifest in the material. Science still thinks, after sneering for over 300 years at Paracelsus and his 'Homunculi' that it is possible to fabricate life in a test tube. It can't be done!

This is not to say that material science has not made some remarkable discoveries during the last 100 years. The techniques for assembling three dimensional structures which led to the decoding of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid) in 1953, are truly commendable achievements which we do not sneer at. In 1967 an American Scientist was awarded the Nobel Prize for 'creating' the entire DNA of a small virus. He then got this DNA to produce new viruses in the test tube. But what in effect he did was to set up a chemical printing press that could produce DNA copies from a master die. This master DNA was made by a virus, not man, but this has not prevented scientists from trying to make a master die. In the 1980s, researchers using recombinant DNA technology succeeded in manufacturing genetically engineered human insulin which has transformed the lives of millions. But these are still only material discoveries, despite the amazing possibilities these investigations of Science hold forth for the future wellbeing of mankind.

In 2010, another American scientist, Craig Venter, reported that he had synthesized the sole chromosome of Mycoplasma mycoides—a bacterium with a relatively small genome—and transplanted it into a separate mycoplasma called M. capricolum, from which his team had previously extracted the DNA. This 'new' bacterium, nicknamed 'Synthia' is said to be capable of replicating billions of times. So it may be, but we say that this is still only a copy, not a 'new' life-form. This is all very praiseworthy, but it is not creation, only copying the work of the Creators. What Life actually is in the ultimate, where it comes from, and how it enters into living organisms, remains as much a mystery to the scientists as ever, but not to Occult scientists, as we discussed in our article on why matter matters.

So much for the present theories of Science, what of its past speculations on the Temple of Man? In Haeckel's The Riddle of the Universe we read: "Comparative ontogeny, or the science of the development of the individual animal, is a child of the nineteenth century in even a truer sense than comparative anatomy and physiology. It is only seventy years since the embryologist Baer pointed out the correct means and methods for penetrating into the mysteries of embryonic life; it is only forty years since Darwin, by his reform of the theory of descent, gave us the key which should open the long-closed door, and lead us to a knowledge of embryonic agencies."

All these older scientists believed that the complete body, with all its parts, was already contained in the ovum (the performation or evolution theory). Then there was the scatulation theory (boxing-up, or packing). This was evolved on the principle that as the outline of the entire organism, with all its parts, was present in the ovum, the ovary of the embryo had to be supposed to contain the ova of the following generation; and so on. On that basis the physiologist Haller calculated that God had created together, 6000 years ago—on the sixth day of his creational labours—the germs of 200,000,000,000 men, and ingeniously packed them all in the ovary of our venerable mother Eve! Even Leibnitz fully accepted this conclusion, and embodied it in his Monadist theory. In 1759 a young German Doctor disproved this theory, but it was not until after he was in his grave that Science would begin to accept his statement, which was called the epigenesis theory.

Linnaeus, the famous Swedish scientist was the first to attempt a systematic arrangement of the nomenclature and classification of the innumerable objects in nature. To each kind of animals and plants he gave a specific name, and added to it the wider-reaching name of genus. This nomenclature proved of such great assistance that it was universally accepted and is still followed in zoological and botanical classification today.

A host of scientists followed; each endeavouring to form a new theory in regard to the evolution of the species and the following theories may be mentioned as the most interesting in regard to creation and evolution.

The dualistic creation in which God first created the inorganic world and then attained intelligence and communicated it to the forces which control organic evolution.

The trialistic creation in which God created the heavens, the earth, and man, found in Genesis.

The Heptameral creation of seven days, also found in Genesis.

The Periodic creation, where at the beginning of each period of the earth's history all animals and plants were created anew and destroyed by a general catastrophe at its close. This comes closest to the Ancient teachings discussed in our article on Occult evolutionary cycles.

And finally individual creation, where every man, plant, or animal is specially created by the favour of God. This theory still has its supporters among some Christian creationists!

The merit of making the first important step in tracing the difficult path of creation and evolution, and of pointing out the way to a monistic solution of all the problems of biology, must be accorded to the French scientist Jean Lamarck. In 1809, the year of Darwin's birth, he published his famous Philosophy of Zoology, in which he makes a splendid effort to interpret all the phenomena of organic life from a monistic and physical point of view. This work led the way to the great enigma—the problem of the natural origin of organic species. Darwin, fifty years later, not only gave a solid foundation to all the essential parts of the theory of descent, but he filled up the gaps in Lamarck's work by his theory of Natural Selection.

That the theory of the evolution of the species was not entirely a modern one is proved by the fact that Anaximander, who flourished about 570 B.C., said that the first man sprang from a different kind of animal, whilst Hippocrates thought that man sprang from a fish, which he at first resembled, and this is not so very wrong as we saw in our investigation. It was also stated by the early philosophers of that time that the first living things were generated in moisture, and were covered with a hard skin. When they were old enough they came up on the dry banks, and after a while the skin cracked off, and they lived on. Xenophanes taught that we all sprang from earth and water.

Heraclitus, whose ideas we discussed in the first of our articles on Esoteric Philosophy, resolved into four words the eternal problem of the search for enlightenment, which will never cease and never come to an end by saying: "Nature loves to hide." This is still true today, for the further Science penetrates into the mysteries of Creation the more wonders she beholds. After the theory of the chromosomes was evolved, the next step was to discover the genes, and these are now considered to be the real units of heredity. Each chromosome contains a chain of genes. In some cases a single gene is sufficient to produce a certain marked effect, in other cases a group of genes conspire together, as it were, to produce another. Sometimes different genes counteract one another. But what is it that compels or urges the genes to act in these various ways? Here material science is silent. "Nature loves to hide!"

Why the original prototype of man first varied from the rest of the animals is not known. Some scientists believe that mutations occur at random. Others believe that individual effort on the part of the animal can affect its germ-plasm.

The 20th century French philosopher Henri Bergson called this the 'Élan vital' and this formed the basis of his celebrated vitalistic theory. But inevitably the same unanswerable question continues to confront us: "What was the origin of life on this planet?" There was the theory of spontaneous generation, but Pasteur proved this to be based on imperfect observation. Yet—scientists find it very difficult to accept a supernatural creative act, as it carries with it what are felt to be undesirable philosophic implications and is opposed to the scientific desire for continuity. The physicist and mathematician, Lord Kelvin (1824-1907) thought that the germs of life may have reached our planet from some other world. This theory goes under the name of Panspermia and was first mentioned in the writings of Anaxagoras in the fifth century B.C. In modern times Fred Hoyle (1915-2001) and Chandra Wickramasinghe were influential proponents of Panspermia. But this simply begs the question of how did these germs originate?

The 19th century biologist Thomas Huxley said more than a 120 years ago: "Looking back through the prodigious vista of the past, I find no record of the commencement of life, and therefore I am devoid of any means of forming a definite conclusion as to the conditions of its appearance." Just so—and we are not one step nearer to the solution of this problem! As Science advances Nature retreats, as it were, into further fastnesses of the infinitely minute. The cyclotrons and other scientific instruments of today are thought to be the means to penetrate still further into the unknown, but the unknown will retreat as usual—"Nature loves to hide!"

In the meantime, as we have seen in this investigation and in our article on gravitational waves, Science evolves one theory after another, only to reject each one after a shorter or longer lapse of time. The men of Science guess, and cover up their guesses with long and learned sounding words and phrases; each word or phrase another screen in front of the light of God, obscuring the truth and leading us into a deeper maze of still more guesses. If they take the liberty of guessing for their own province, why should the intelligent thinker be debarred from entering there? Why should the loudest shouters in physics, biology, biochemistry, geology, or whatever other 'ology', always impose their wills on the world and force the rest of mankind to unthinkingly accept their guesses as if they were Holy Writ?

This has gone on for thousands of years; each school of speculators sneering at the other; all like overgrown schoolboys, trying to capture a ghost with a butterfly net, whilst the essences of life or diseases just sneer in their turn and escape through the holes!

Can it be true perhaps that one or more of the thinkers of this world, people who do not shout, have solved the problem of first creation and subsequent evolution? In our occult studies course article on Evolution, we gave you our version of how it might have come to pass. This may be just as good a guess, or even a better guess than the guesses of Science. Who shall disprove it?

You cannot dissect creation with a scalpel or boil it in a retort, and so find the final secret——"Nature loves to hide." For the secret of creation and the Temple you dwell in is a secret of the Spirit and it cannot be solved by material means. We cannot emphasise this important point often or strongly enough.

Material science is one of the greatest achievements of the human intellect; but unless a scientist is also a truly spiritual man, he cannot have that inner discernment or vision which will light up his path with wisdom. It is inevitable that the strict training a scientist receives which allows him to reach his conclusions only by the observation of so-called scientific 'facts,' steeps his mind so deeply in materialism that the eye of inner enlightenment will fail to operate. Result—still more theories and guesses! And Nature still in hiding!

By this we do not mean that we should employ psychics, who will (for a modest fee) 'channel' some discarnate entity with an impressive name and take down their portentous messages direct from the 'fifth' dimension, which messages will tell you anything from the movements of oil shares to winning lottery numbers, or how human beings are descended from extraterrestrial colonists. But we should seek within for the answers to the great mysteries of the without. For, as we said in the conclusion to this investigation, Verily—we are the lamps of God. There is a Light within each one of us which can shed light on all that is yet dark. And that Light is the reflection of our own Soul, which we call the Higher Self.