Humility
Afterword by John Temple
When the editors of occult-mysteries asked me whether I wished to write another afterword just a few short weeks after contributing one to their excellent article on Love, I was in half a mind to tell them to think again! But when they—with premeditated cunning—sent me Seán Mac Gréine's uplifting tale, my objections vanished like snow in the rays of the Sun.

Their accompanying note said they needed some quotes about humility, especially from the Bible, to complement the story, which challenging and arduous task was apparently 'right up my cloister', or so they said. "You can do that yourselves," I replied, "so I'll be sending you something completely different." That 'something' is before you, dear reader, and I can only hope it meets with your and the author's approval. I humbly confess it does include 'quotes' from the Bible, as well as other sources, though I'm proud enough to hope you'll enjoy my bits more!

Before I begin, I would like to make it clear that I have retired, and that I do not intend to make a habit of penning afterwords—whether they fall within my 'cloister' or not—on a regular and continuing basis. Neither will I be writing any new series like my 'Search for Truth' for the website; such endeavours require more time and energy than I can find in my 91st year. However, I will be submitting the odd (I use the word advisedly!) piece from time to time for as long as I am able. So that should satisfy those of you who have sent me expressions of appreciation via the editors and kind pleas to 'carry on'.

Now—to business. My first quote about humility comes from one of my favourite authors. As well as being a pretty wise old bird he was one of the most accomplished writers on occultism of the 19th or any other century. That man was Edward Bulwer-Lytton, several of whose occult novels are reviewed on this website. Do, please read them if you haven't. You won't be disappointed. In his occult masterpiece Zanoni, Bulwer Lytton wrote: "Man is arrogant in proportion to his ignorance." It then follows, as day follows night, that the opposite must be true too; i.e., man is humble in proportion to his knowledge. But is he?

We have to be careful here, for words can be so very misleading. Earthly knowledge is as likely to puff up a man with pride than foster humility. For as we may read in The Golden Star, "Knowledge, which is so greatly esteemed upon earth, is no passport to the Heavenly Realms, my son. Nor is the ugliness of empty beauty, the shallowness of high ambition, the lowliness of a kingly throne, the poverty of great riches, or the sinfulness of prideful righteousness. Earthly intelligence is but stupid ignorance when compared with Heavenly Wisdom." This then, is what Bulwer-Lytton meant by 'ignorance', not lack of knowledge, per se, as the dictionary defines it, but a lack of Heavenly knowledge, or of Gnosis if you like.

That this is the correct interpretation what follows in the book makes clear. The Sage, Mejnour is addressing his probationary pupil, Glyndon. "Man's natural tendency is to egotism. Man, in his infancy of knowledge, thinks that all creation was formed for him." How familiar this sounds today! As I write this afterword we are in the last weeks before Armageddon descends upon us—sorry—"we get Brexit done," in the words of our bombastic Prime Minister. I rather think WE are the ones who will have been well and truly 'done' by the time this lunacy is over.

Rumour has it that not-so-bumbling Boris and his crepusculous cronies have deliberately engineered a no-deal Brexit. Why, you may ask innocently, as I did when I first encountered this appalling slur on the probity and altruism of our modest and humble Prime Minister. So they can cash in on the fall of the pound against the dollar precipitated by a 'crises of confidence' is the chilling answer. I'm told their winnings could exceed eight billion pounds.

Whether or not any of this is true, I cannot think of a time when hubris, both within the body politic and among the general population, has been displayed with such naked smugness. This does not bode well, for we all know what comes before a fall and it isn't a banana-skin. Whether they'll be any bananas after Brexit is another question, the answer to which would take me even further away from my subject.

Or perhaps not. If you've been paying attention, both to me and the events of the past few years, not only in this country, but in the rest of the world too, you'll have noticed that humility is conspicuous by its absence pretty much everywhere. This bodes even less well for humanity and has an ominous precedent in the fall of Atlantis. "Then the third and fourth races (the Atlantean) became tall with pride. 'We are the Kings, we are the gods," they said, as the ancient records tell us, as we can read in Volume 2, page 271 of The Secret Doctrine.

One of the best descriptions of pride can be found in the foreword to The Teachings of Li Wang Ho where the 'seven cardinal sins' to be avoided are listed. The Chinese Sage does not mince his words! "This (Pride) is an altogether unpardonable Sin and shows an utter absence of Intelligence and Appreciation of the Benevolence of the Gods. For it is only They who can bestow that of which man, in his stupidity, is so proud. And not only that; but they do not realise that their unworthy pride is as much an illusion as the things on which they pride themselves. For this reason the Gods make sometimes a last effort to guide this erring type of person, by taking away and completely destroying that of which he is so pompously proud; and all he has been given dominion over will be as a blast of icy wind from the North which will freeze him with terror at his loss."

J Michaud has quite a lot to say about Pride in his books in one way or another, and by extension, this tells us much about its opposite—Humility, too. Let's look at a few examples of what I mean, not all of which are obvious. "In every superstition and in every myth, in every form of austerity as practised by inspired ascetics, there is hidden something which can be discerned by the simple of mind, which the over-educated fail to see in the pride of their great intellectual achievements. Such beings as the latter are blinded by self-exaltation, conceit and vanity, while the simple man looks on with the eyes of a child and beholds all verity in his sublime innocence, although he cannot put it into high-sounding words by means of well-rounded phrases."

This is from chapter 10 of The Quest of Ruru in which the eponymous seeker after Truth first encounters the wise Gnani or philosopher who is later to become his fast friend.

Previous to this exchange between the Gnani and Ruru, the latter had been "showing off, led on by his pride," as the book tells us, by sneering at the simple and innocent beliefs of the pure in heart and mind. The book continues: "A single tear fell from the eye of the ascetic, for, although he well knew that Ruru had deserved a wise rebuke, his heart was soft towards his friend and he felt a pang of sorrow when he beheld his shame." This elicits the following reply from Ruru: "I am grateful, Sir, for the well-merited lesson you have given me; a moment's exuberation of the spirit has made me commit an error which I regret; will you forgive me?" Of course the Gnani forgives him. Who would not given such a sincere and humble apology?

No one in whom the lower self is dominant would understand a syllable of what the Gnani told Ruru, let alone apologise for showing off in front of him. So here we have a practical lesson in dealing with our fellow human beings all can profit from. The prideful man or woman never apologises. To do so would immediately diminish their non-existent status and worldly accomplishments.

Does this remind you of a prominent politician currently looming large in the news? Someone who has consistently refused to tender any apology for certain actions widely thought to require one or several. Then again, can you imagine anyone truly humble going into politics in the first place? I am reminded of the ecclesiastical Latin phrase 'nolo episcopari'. On the other hand many politicians are so very duplicitous and mendacious that confessing they don't wish to occupy a particular position of power is the surest indication that they do!

Later on in the book, Ruru's Master Narada has a few choice words for the sorry crew of puffed-up intellectuals who strut upon the stage of life, displaying the gaudy feathers of their erudition for the admiration of the masses. Here they are: "Such foolish men may even pride themselves on their "intelligence," not realising that "intellect" is nothing more than a natural development of their animal instincts and animal cunning, such as that displayed by the apes, for instance, and only slightly more mature and therefore more dangerous and misleading.

"Such men sneer at what they call "enthusiasm," which should always be distrusted. . . .so they say. They do not realise that the enlightened enthusiast has more chance to tune in—on account of his accelerated state of inner vibration—with the higher vibrations of the superior worlds, than the "intellectual" who is no more than a more or less educated animal, only a few degrees above those whom we all admired in a circus when we were still very young. Similar "intellectuals" fill all the lower astral worlds to overflowing, and the only way out for them is to return to earth, to add to the confusion there amongst the vapid dreamers, not so intellectual."

Harsh words, but if you have any experience of the smug windbags who can be found holding forth from university chairs, church pulpits, political podiums and in boardrooms up and down the land, you will know Narada speaks the truth. He continues: "Both intellectuals and dreamers have a long way to go, and they should be classified as belonging to the same category of ignorant men; no matter how much the intellectuals will dislike this unpalatable truth. For both live in the same darkness of non-perception. . . .which is the most hideous SIN. Having been offered the true Light—perhaps—they turn away and mope and grope in material obscurity. . . .taking that for the Light. Poor souls, or rather wandering minds, for of the Soul itself they know naught."

All this tells us a great deal about pride and how and where it manifests, and therefore about humility too, for the universal laws of Occult Science teach us that all things, conditions and beings have their opposites, and if we know one side, we know the other too. I promised you a few Biblical quotes, so here is one that affirms everything I've discussed so far.

"Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?" (Proverbs 30:4).

There are too many good things in this verse to discuss them all in this short afterword, but perhaps the most important is humility. For without humility we can learn nothing, for our own intellectual pride bars the way to truth.

The first line is a concealed reference to the higher and lower realms. The following lines are rather more obscure. As I have pointed out in my many articles, there are very few verses in the Bible that do not refer to some occult truth, law or fact, and this one is no exception. It is noteworthy that 'wind' and 'water' are both fluids which in chemistry change from the gaseous to the liquid state depending on temperature and pressure.

So probably what is meant here is the Astral Light. This is both a fluid and a 'wind' which, as the authors of this website explain in their study course, receives all the thoughts, desires and emotions of mankind, and reflects them back again, somewhat like a vast 'memory' web that surrounds the entire earth and interpenetrates all material forms and beings. No human being, however wise or powerful, can 'gather' this in his 'fists'—meaning comprehend its entire contents—nor can he 'bind' it, meaning control it. Only the Creator can do these things and those hosts of beings whom the ancients called 'gods' who work under Him, manipulating matter into the forms intended for it.

The 'ends of the earth' has many possible meanings. It may refer to the aura which surrounds our planet which science has barely begun to investigate. It may refer to the North and South Poles which, together with the magnetic fields which flow between and around them produce such phenomena as the Aurora Borealis. These forces too, are poorly understood by science. Or the verse may refer to the invisible realms which surround our earth—the so-called 'Astral World'—of which science knows absolutely nothing, neither their number (the 'ends') nor their nature. Indeed, I think this is the most likely and intended meaning.

What has all this got to do with the importance of being humble? Everything! Remember what I said earlier: without humility we can learn nothing, for our own intellectual pride bars the way to truth. We might add vanity and blindness to the obstacles which hide the truth from us. In Seán Mac Gréine's story, Horace Humble suffers from all these vices and more, but is stung into wakefulness in the end and recognises the importance of being his true Self, which is humble, a rather clever pun by the author first employed for different purposes by Oscar Wilde who was himself undone by pride.

Back to those Biblical quotes I've been contracted to supply and explain. There are 45 references to humility in the Old Testament and only 11 in the new. Why is that? I'll leave that to my readers to explain! Instead, I would like to end my afterword with a verse from the Apocrypha which might have been written for Horace Humble. "Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness of his soul: for there is one which humbleth and exalteth" (Ecclesiasticus 7:11). That 'one', of course, is God. Though he can raise up a man or woman, he rarely needs to cast them down; we manage that quite nicely all on our own as Seán Mac Gréine tells us in his marvellous story.