Libretto and music
In this afterword we look at the origins of the libretto and the music of Messiah.
As we said in the introduction to our investigation, the libretto for Messiah was not written by Handel, but by Charles Jennens (1700-1773). Jennens was a wealthy landowner and patron of the arts with somewhat controversial religious views which prevented him from receiving a doctorate in Theology from Balliol College, Oxford, which he left in 1716 without graduating.

Jennens' deep knowledge of the Bible and abiding love for Handel's music led him to help finance the publication of every Handel score from 1725 until the composer's death in 1759. He also contributed several libretti, all of which were published anonymously, which speaks volumes for his humility and erudition! By 1741, after their collaboration on Saul, a warm friendship developed between Jennens and Handel who became a frequent visitor to the Jennens family estate at Gopsall, in Leicestershire.

Jennens first makes mention of Messiah in a letter to his friend, Edward Holdsworth, written on 10 July 1741. We know Handel began work on the score on 22 August, so we may be sure that Jennens' libretto was of very recent origin. Although we have no evidence that Handel collaborated in the selection or preparation of the libretto, such as he did in the case of Saul; the fact that he made no significant changes to it suggests that he thoroughly approved of Jennens' work. However, the reverse was not the case, for we find Jennens writing to Holdsworth: "I have with great difficulty made him (Handel) correct some of the grossest faults in the composition; but he retained his overture obstinately, in which there are some passages far unworthy of Handel, but much more unworthy of the Messiah."

Over the years musicologists have not been slow to castigate Jennens for daring to criticise Handel's score, but the fact that this Divinely inspired composer largely accepted Jennens' amendments suggests to us that Handel at least partially recognised the esoteric meaning concealed in the libretto which Jennens' critics are wholly unaware of. From this it follows that Jennens must have possessed considerable occult knowledge. Indeed, we are certain of it, for no one without such knowledge, whether conscious or unconscious, could possibly have chosen the highly significant verses from the Bible which we analysed in our article.

Having said this, there is no evidence that Jennens was ever directly involved with Occultism, though, like many of his contemporaries, he was a Freemason. Consequently, his reticence was in no way unusual in the 18th century, as we saw in our investigation of the hidden meanings in Mozart's Magic Flute.

In those times the Church was still a powerful force in the secular world, and although it no longer burned heretics at the stake, its anathemas against those who questioned its dogmas, or worse, were seen to be associated with the 'occult', were not to be lightly dismissed. Many a man who fell foul of its opprobrium had his career and reputation irrevocably ruined, and this is reason enough for Jennens to have exercised the profoundest discretion and circumspection in regard to his private beliefs and studies.

So much for Jennens' important contribution to Messiah, what of the work itself?

The music was completed in just 24 days. Having received Jennens' libretto after 10 July 1741, Handel began work on 22 August and completed the score on 14 September. The original manuscript is held in the British Library's music collection and is scored for 2 trumpets, timpani, 2 oboes, 2 violins, viola, and basso continuo (cello, double bass, and harpsichord).

Although Messiah is not in any particular key, Handel's tonal scheme has been summarised as "an aspiration towards D major", a key long associated with Light and Life, and thus with the theme of spiritual resurrection which is the soul of the music and the libretto. As the oratorio proceeds, D major emerges at significant points, primarily the "trumpet" movements with their uplifting messages. It is the key in which the work reaches its triumphant ending. In the absence of a predominant key, one musicologist has suggested that Handel used the device of the "ascending fourth" as a unifying motif, most noticeably in the first two notes of "I know that my Redeemer liveth" and on numerous other occasions.

E minor is used for the opening symphony, and as this is the note associated with the Higher Self, it is eminently appropriate. Part II begins in G minor, which as we saw in our article on the Magic of Music, has the colour blue and corresponds to the aura in man. We all know what it means to feel 'blue' and blues music evokes sadness, longing and loss, all emotions which we associate with the Passion of the Saviour which forms the dominant theme in this part of Messiah.

D Major reoccurs in Part Three, with the words "Behold, I tell you a mystery", which is followed by the long aria "The trumpet shall sound", marked pomposo ma non allegro (dignified but not fast). Handel originally wrote this in da capo form, but shortened it to dal segno, probably before the first performance. D major also ushers in the choral finale: "Worthy is the Lamb", leading to the apocalyptic "Amen" which concludes the oratorio. The musicians among our readers may explore these correspondences further if they wish, but we have said enough, for, as we point out in several articles, we are not musicians!

But we cannot omit to mention that Handel appended his manuscript with the abbreviation "SDG (Soli Deo Gloria), meaning "To God alone the glory". This postcriptum, together with the rapidity of the work leaves no doubt in our minds that Messiah was the fruit of Divine Inspiration, though some carping critics think otherwise! Handel confirms this when he tells us that he "saw all heaven before him" whilst writing the famous 'Hallelujah' chorus which concludes Part II.

The tradition which connects Messiah with Christmas owes nothing to the oratorio's origins which arose from Jennens' libretto. In his letter to Edward Holdsworth, mentioned earlier, Jennens tells us: "Handel says he will do nothing next Winter, but I hope I shall persuade him to set another Scripture Collection I have made for him, and perform it for his own Benefit in Passion Week. I hope he will lay out his whole Genius and Skill upon it, that the Composition may excel all his former Compositions, as the Subject excels every other Subject. The Subject is Messiah." Handel is said to have wept during the composition of his score. We have no doubt of it, for there is no greater blessing nor more humbling an experience than to be the recipient of Divine Inspiration.

Jennens arrived in London at the end of November 1741 hoping to find Handel there and hear the first performance of Messiah, but to his surprise learnt that the composer had taken his score to Ireland with him! Not much is known about the reason for Handel's precipitate departure, but he was probably invited to perform in Ireland by the Duke of Devonshire. Dublin had an active theatre and concert life and Handel's visit coincided with the opening of a new concert venue, the Great Music Hall in Fishamble Street, where Handel gave two performances of his pastoral ode based on the poetry of John Milton—L'Allegro, his pastoral operetta Acis and Galatea and his oratorio Esther between December 1741 and February 1742.

This series of concerts finished on 7 April 1742, but Handel was impatient to capitalise on his eager audience, so arranged the first performance of Messiah for April 13. The premiere was a huge triumph. The alto soloist, Susanna Cibber, was an actress who had attracted scandal in the past, but legend has it that her emotional performance of 'He was despised' moved Dr Patrick Delany—the husband of one of Handel's most ardent champions—to exclaim "Woman, for this, be all your sins forgiven." This was a generous sentiment, if a somewhat disingenuous one, as the good doctor was no stranger to 'sin' himself having kept at least one mistress during his marriages!

The enthusiastic reception accorded to Messiah in Dublin was not repeated in London when Handel introduced the work at the Covent Garden theatre on 23 March 1743. The performance was overshadowed by press criticism that the subject matter of the work was too exalted to be performed in public, particularly by secular singer-actresses such as Susanna Cibber who was tainted with 'sin'! In an attempt to deflect such pious sensibilities, Handel avoided the name Messiah and presented the work as the "New Sacred Oratorio."

The custom of standing for the "Hallelujah" chorus originates from a belief that, at the London premiere, King George II did so, which would have obliged all to stand. Like many pretty stories, this one is unlikely to be true, as there is no evidence that the king was present or that he attended any subsequent performances of Messiah! The first reference to the practice of standing appears in a letter dated over seven years later when the chapel of the Foundling Hospital became the venue for regular charity performances of Messiah from 1750 onwards.

London's initially cool reception of Messiah led Handel to reduce the season's planned six performances to three, and not to present the work at all in 1744—to the considerable annoyance of Jennens, whose relations with the composer were temporarily soured. At Jennens' request, Handel made several changes in the music for the 1745 season. "Their sound is gone out" became a choral piece, the soprano song "Rejoice greatly" was shortened and the transpositions for Cibber's voice were restored to their original soprano range.

In 1749 the work was revived at Covent Garden, under the proper title of Messiah, which saw the appearance of two female soloists who were henceforth closely associated with Handel's music: Giulia Frasi and Caterina Galli. In the following year these were joined by the male alto Gaetano Guadagni, for whom Handel composed new versions of "But who may abide" and "Thou art gone up on high." The year 1750 saw the institution of the annual charity performances of Messiah at London's Foundling Hospital.

The 1754 performance at the hospital is the first for which full details of the orchestral and vocal forces survive. The orchestra included fifteen violins, five violas, three cellos, two double-basses, four bassoons, four oboes, two trumpets, two horns and drums. In the chorus of nineteen were six trebles from the Chapel Royal; the remainder, all men, were altos, tenors and basses. Frasi, Galli and Beard led the five soloists, who were required to assist the chorus. For this performance the transposed Guadagni arias were restored to the soprano voice.

By 1754 Handel was losing his sight, and in 1755 he turned over the direction of Messiah hospital performance to his pupil, J. C. Smith. On 6 April 1759, when he was blind and in failing health, Handel insisted on attending a performance of Messiah at the Theatre Royal in Covent Garden. Just eight days later, this God-like genius, his mission accomplished, returned to his Heavenly Home.