Oera Linda Book
In this second part of our afterword, we continue our discussion of the Oera Linda Book. If you have not read part one, now is the time to do so.
Let us begin by comparing a few of the rules of the Vikings we discussed in the previous part of this afterword according to what is written in the book about them. No Viking might wear a sword more than an ell in length (about 18 inches), that they might be compelled to close in battle. Each was to be equal in strength to twelve ordinary men. They made prisoners of neither women nor boys, but slew them all. None was to bind his wounds until the lapse of twenty hours. They never raised the bulwarks on their ships' sides, and never lowered their sails, let the wind blow as it would. They had to eat raw flesh in the case of the fiercer class of these robbers, and washed it down suitably with draughts of blood. Savage in all things, it was an amusement to toss infants from one to another, and catch them on the points of their lances. Atlanteans. . . .

They were skilled in black magic, probably learnt from their Lap, or Finn ancestors, though it is also possible that this 'art' was brought across from Atlantis, where black magicians flourished exceedingly towards the end. Now let us turn again to the other side of the picture, and listen once more to the words of Frya, the great goddess; she says: "Let not your neighbour express his thanks to you on bended knee, which is only due to the spirit of Wr-alda. Envy would assail you, Wisdom would ridicule you, and my maidens would accuse you of irreverence."

How wise this counsel is! For what can any of us give to another that has not been filched from our Mother—the Earth—in some way? Therefore, if we would be wise, let us not be tempted to accept credit which belongs to God alone and remain humble at all times. Frya further says: "Four things are given for your enjoyment—air, water, land, and fire—but Wr-alda is the sole possessor of them all. If any man shall deprive another, even his debtor, of his liberty, let him be to you as a vile slave; and I advise you to burn his body and that of his mother in an open place, and bury him fifty feet below the ground, so that no grass shall grow upon him. It would poison your cattle. Meddle not with the people of Lyda, nor of Finda, because Wr-alda would help them, and any injury that you inflicted upon them would recoil upon your own heads."

Here we have something to think about. For why, might you ask, should God help the evil people and not you, who are good? Remember the wise maxim that he who touches pitch will get black. Therefore, if you willingly mix with evil, the results be on your own head, and God will turn away his countenance from you, and leave you to the inevitable result of your unwisdom.

But Frya adds: "If it should happen that they (meaning the evil ones) come to you for advice, or assistance, then it behoves you to help them; but if they should rob you, then fall upon them with fire and sword." The apostles of appeasement, both past and present, will not like this at all, yet had this good advice been followed in 1939, the Second World War might have ended all the sooner without such terrible loss of life and suffering.

"If any of them (the evil ones) should seek a daughter of yours to wife, and she is willing, explain to her her folly; but if she will follow her lover, let her go in peace." This too, is a wise law, for we cannot, and must not interfere with the freedom of any human being, though we are permitted to warn.

"If your son wishes for a daughter of theirs, do the same as to your daughter; but let not either one or the other ever return among you, for they would introduce foreign morals and customs, and if these were accepted by you, I could no longer watch over you." At first sight such laws may seem cruel and unjust to those who believe in multiculturalism, which is often a cloak for mawkish sentimentality at best and a dangerous delusion at worst. Yet, if this wise advice had been acted upon throughout the last two thousand years, and especially since the Second World War, there is a chance that today there might be a greater amount of happiness than any one can claim for this world.

Several commandments are laid down in the book; such as that the Laws shall be inscribed upon the walls of the city, so that all may read and know them and thus benefit from the ancient wisdom. That a continual light shall be burned wherever a citadel is built, the lamp of which light shall be lit at the original lamp where the Atlanteans first landed after the debacle, namely, the Island of Texland, which, we presume is now that island known as Texel, the largest of the West Frisian Islands situated off the northern coast of The Netherlands.

The book tells us that the Mother of the shrine at Texland shall have one and twenty maidens to serve the lamp day and night, so that at all times there shall be seven assistants to that light. The Mother is the only one who may light new lamps by means of the original light at Texland, and she may appoint her own successor.

If a maiden wishes to marry she must at once inform the Mother, and resign her office at once, before her passion shall have polluted the light. For the service of the Mother and the maidens there shall be appointed one and twenty townsmen, namely; seven civilians of mature years, seven warriors of mature years, and seven seamen of mature years.

There must be shrines or temples in each town, and each temple shall be defended by three hundred young townsmen. Of the one and twenty men, mentioned above, three must retire each year, and must not be replaced by members of their own family nearer than the fourth degree. The three hundred defenders must study the texts of Frya's Laws; from the sages they must learn wisdom, from the warriors the art of war, and from the sea-kings the art of navigation. Every year one hundred of them must retire to their homes, and those that may have been wounded in war shall remain within the citadels. At the election of the defenders, no man of rank and distinction may vote, but the people only.

The book goes on to list many more laws and regulations, but even in the few we've mentioned you will have noted how frequently such symbolic numbers as three and seven, etc., recur.

All free-born men were considered to be equal, and had equal rights on sea and land, and so all that God has given to mankind. Every man was free to seek the wife of his choice, and every woman was free to bestow her hand on the man she loved. When a man took a wife, a house and yard had to be given to him. If none such were available, then a house had to be built for him and his wife.

Each house had a piece of land behind it, but no man was permitted to have any land in front of his house, unless he had done some remarkable deed or performed some public service. All had free use of the common, and the community were not permitted to take away pieces of the common in order to build their houses upon them, despoiling the air and scenery, and depriving people of their rights. The chief of every town or village was responsible for the upkeep of the common, and must keep it in good repair, so that posterity might inherit it uninjured and unexploited in any way.

How different this is from our own times when one can hardly walk a few miles in the countryside without encountering signs threatening us with 'trespassers will be prosecuted', 'private property', 'keep out!' and so on and so forth!

We further learn that all towns and villages must have a market place, and all the rest of the land must be for tillage and forest. The forests, however, belonged to all, and no man could claim any part of it for his own use only, or say it was his own property. But trees could be felled only by consent of the community, and there was a forester to each forest who also had a say in the matter.

Usury was forbidden, for people will betray any one for the sake of greed, being hard-hearted brutes who deserve to be killed. We would interject at this point that these laws are exactly the same as those enacted by the Incas of Peru, as anyone can read in Prescott's History of the Conquest of Peru as well as in the Native accounts of that land, proving once more, if such were needed, how all these things link up and point to a common source—Atlantis.

In one part of the Oera Linda Book we are told that the Finns lived at one time in Atlantis, but fled before the submersion, to the north, and it is they who caused all mischief, being sorcerers, and wizards, and ruthless warriors too. For this reason the people of Texland were adverse from intercourse with them; hence the aforementioned rules about a son or daughter marrying a stranger.

To defend the land, each boy, at the age of twelve, had to spend one day in seven learning the use of weapons. As soon as he was perfect, weapons were given to him and he was admitted to the rank of warrior. After serving as a warrior for three years he became a citizen, and could vote in the election of a headman. After being a voter for seven years he might have a vote for a chief or king, and then he himself could be elected as such.

Every year he had to be re-elected, but, except the king, all other officials were re-eligible if they acted according to Frya's laws. No king could be in office for more than three years in order that the office should not become permanent, but after an interval of seven years, a king could be re-elected again. A king might not use arms, only wisdom should be his weapon, and the love of his warriors his shield.

What great wisdom there is in all these regulations and how superior they are to our much vaunted modern 'democratic' institutions! And all this is pure Atlantean wisdom, which must have taken many, many centuries to evolve. What a different world it would be today if such wise laws were still in existence. How were they lost? It is hard to come to any definite conclusion about this, but knowing the power inherent in the unevolved in whom the ruthless lower self is in full command at all times, we may hazard a guess.

No doubt there were invasions and cataclysms of all sorts too, so that the good were overwhelmed by the evil ones, just as happened when the ruffianly Spanish invaded the Americas in their lust for gold and destroyed the great civilisations that flourished there, leaving disease, poverty and lawlessness in their stead, which conditions persist to the present day in the drug wars, corruption and vice which is endemic in Mexico and other countries.

Further rules about the protection of the land are given by the Frisians whose forbears came from Atlantis, and these insured that no single man should profit by war in any way, but that all should work for the good of all. Thus, if houses or ships were lost in war, or destroyed, there was a general levy so that they could be replaced again. Any man wounded to such an extent as to make him incapable of work again as a result of war, was kept at the public expense for the rest of his life. Such had the best seats at festivals, so that the young might observe and honour them. Widows and orphans of warriors killed or severely wounded were also kept by the general purse, and sons might inscribe their names on the family shields in remembrance and to the honour of their families.

Again, how different all this is from our present-day customs! Now, the faithful soldier is cast aside the moment he is of no further use to his erstwhile masters, and if he should have been so unfortunate as to have been maimed in the service of his country so much the worse for him and his dependents who must then suffer want along with their grief, the recipients of grudging charity doled out by governments with one hand, whilst the other lavishes millions on the 'celebration' and 'remembrance' of wars waged to maintain the power and wealth of the ruling elite. What a disgusting travesty of 'civilised' behaviour this is. And yet countless millions labour under the delusion that our Western, scientific 'democracies' are far more 'advanced' than any civilisation that preceded us: words fail us!

If any Frisians who had been taken prisoner should return, they had to be kept separately in special camps, lest they had regained their liberty by making treacherous promises to the enemy. Thus they were enabled to avoid keeping these promises without any loss of honour. If prisoners were taken, they were sent to the interior, treated kindly, and taught how free men may live in friendship; and after the war they were set free by the maidens, in order to make them friends if possible, instead of haters. What practical wisdom and justice there is in this, do you not agree dear reader? Sadly, the wise laws, regulations and customs the Frisians had inherited from their Atlantean forebears were not to last. The reasons for their loss are not far to seek, for early on the book, the narrator writes:

"Beloved successors, for the sake of our dear forefathers, and of our dear liberty, I entreat you a thousand times never let the eye of a monk look on these writings. They are very insinuating, but they destroy in an underhand manner all that relates to us Frisians. In order to gain rich benefices, they conspire with foreign kings, who know that we are their greatest enemies, because we dare to speak to their people of liberty, rights, and the duties of princes. Therefore they seek to destroy all that we derive from our forefathers, and all that is left of our old customs. Ah, my beloved ones! I have visited their courts! If Wr-alda permits it, and we do not show ourselves strong to resist, they will altogether exterminate us."

This was written in 803 A.D., when one Liko copied the book on foreign paper after the original had been damaged in a flood. From this we can trace the main cause of the destruction of the wise freedom of the old Frisians to the Christian Church. In the Ecclesiastical History of the English People written by the Venerable Bede we may read how as early as 690 A.D., Friesland was 'converted' from 'idolatry' by means of the priest Wilbrord, who is described as "a man eminent for his merit and rank in the priesthood." Bede further tells us that Wilbrord, who had arrived in France from England with eleven other priests, and "turning aside to Pepin, Duke of the Franks, were graciously received by him; and as he had lately subdued the Hither Friesland, and expelled King Rathbed, he sent them thither to preach, supporting them at the same time with his authority, that none might molest them in their preaching, and bestowing many favours on those who consented to embrace the faith."

In these few words of Bede's we can read what must have taken place there at the time: bribery on the one hand, and the persecution of those who did not consent on the other! The fact that the invader of Friesland needed the 'authority' of the brutish Pepin in order to subdue the free people of Friesland can be readily understood when in the preceding chapter of the book, Bede tells us that another priest called Wictbert went to Friesland, where he "preached the word salvation for the space of two years successively to that nation and to its king Rathbed; but reaped no fruit of all his great labour among his barbarous auditors."

No wonder, for what could he offer those 'barbarians' that was better than the wisdom, and the devotion to God's Laws, brought with them from the great continent of their origin? A seat of ancient learning and wisdom, where the wise knew the ordinances of the Lord much better than the ignorant and fanatic priests who went from Britain to Friesland in order to 'convert' them to their own way of thinking and preaching the 'Word'. At any rate, barbarous as the Frisians were, they did not harm the priest and permitted him to return to his own country in the end. And not until the next gang came armed with that 'authority' and the means to bribe, were there any conversions to the Christian Faith at all.

Bede continues: "Thus it came to pass, that with the assistance of the Divine Grace, they in a short time converted many from idolatry to the faith of Christ." The smugness of these words is almost unbelievable, and it seems strange that the rude Frankish king could have been chosen as the instrument of that 'divine grace', for there was not much graciousness in the brutality of those savage German tribes, if history is correct, and we do not doubt it in this respect. The leopard does not change his spots, not even in a couple of thousand years or thereabouts!

So, Christianity, backed by the kind Frankish king, stepped in, and all the wisdom of the Atlanteans was eventually so successfully stamped out that today there is no trace of it in Friesland, and has not been for many, many centuries, as is the case all over the world, including the British Isles!

We have now learnt that the communal laws and regulations of the Atlanteans, as reflected in those of the Frisians, were as sound as any law today, and, in fact, wiser and better. Let us give you just one way to prevent war, according to the Frisians. "If any one should be so wicked as to commit robbery, murder, arson, rape, or any other crime, upon a neighbouring state, and our people wish to inflict punishment, the culprit shall be put to death in the presence of the offended, in order that no war may arise, and the innocent suffer for the guilty. If the offended will spare his life and forego their revenge, it may be permitted."

You can read more about the wise laws of the Atlanteans as recorded in the Oera Linda Book in the final afterword to this three part investigation.