Oera Linda Book
In our final afterword, we conclude our discussion of the Oera Linda Book. If you have not read part one and part two, now is the time to do so if you wish to read what follows in context.
We now come to a most interesting part of the Oera Linda Book, in which we are told of Minno, an ancient sea-king, who was both a seer and a philosopher, who gave laws to the Cretans. He was born at Lindaoord, in Friesland, and wandered all over the world, returning in the end to the land of his birth, and he died there at Lindahem.

It is this section of the book which especially roused the ire of the learned critics who tore the English translation to pieces in 1876. That he was an immediate descendant of the Atlanteans is almost sure; and we know, or at least the scientists tell us, that the original inhabitants of Crete, whose civilisation was the forerunner of that of ancient Greece, belonged to the so-called Mediterranean race, distinguished by long heads, dark complexions, and shortness of stature. They too were a sea-faring people, and their civilisation is known as the Aegean, Minoan, and Mycenaean.

Now the Oera Linda Book is quite definite that king Minno was the one who brought civilisation to the Cretans, and there is no reason to doubt this given that the Frisians wrote of their own times, or times much nearer to them than they are to us. Moreover, as we have seen so far, the contents of the book are too elevated to be regarded as a forgery, as the critics wish us to believe. There is too much real, long forgotten wisdom in that book, so we accept it as true; just as we accept as true what king Minno had to say for the guidance of his own people in Friesland.

His principal teachings have to do with moral tenets, such as fairness, honesty, respecting the rights of others, and dismissing all who offend against such things. No traders, for instance, must be permitted to visit the Frisian Islands unless they have proved themselves to be honest in every way. Any cheat, whether foreign or local, must be banished from the land "that our name be everywhere held in honour."

Here is one good rule which might be followed not only today but at all times. "If we should be ill-treated in a foreign market, whether distant or near, we must immediately attack them, for though we desire to be at peace, we must not let our neighbours underrate us or think we are afraid." If this rule had been in force during any part of the last, or the present century, it is quite probable that the two World Wars and continuing strife in the Middle-East and other parts of this sorely-troubled globe might have been avoided. The doctrine of appeasement, which we referred to in part two of this afterword, is one of the most deadly sins any statesman could perpetrate against his own people, who have placed him in his position to defend their rights, honour, and privileges. But let that pass.

King Minno says: "In my youth I often grumbled at the strictness of the laws, but afterwards I learned to thank Frya for her wisdom (Tex) and our forefathers (The Atlanteans) for the laws which they established upon it. Wr-alda has given me many years, and I have travelled over many lands and seas, and after all I have seen, I am convinced that we alone are chosen to have laws. Lyda's people can neither make laws nor obey them, they are too stupid and uncivilised."

We could name one or two of these stupid and uncivilised people here, but you will be able to do it yourselves! King Minno continues: "Many are like Finda. They are clever enough, but they are too rapacious, haughty, false, immoral and bloodthirsty. The toad blows himself out, but he can only crawl; the frog cries, 'Work, Work;' but he can do nothing but hop and make himself ridiculous. The raven cries, 'Spare, Spare;' but he steals and wastes everything that he gets into his beak."

How little times, and people, have changed! The toads, the frogs, the ravens, not to mention the wolves, the jackals that everywhere abound, intent upon vice and viciousness, depravity and pollution, brutality and corruption. Being given to malpractices and dissipation, they scowl at virtue and trust it not, being born knaves who should be kept in check by the wise; but where are the wise today? Not where they should be. For the masses, who are born fools and without any form of wit, do not desire to have the wise control their silly destinies, unless in times of danger, when they tremble at the voice of the enemy. But as soon as that danger seems to have passed away, the wise are sent into retirement, and clowns and lunatics take charge again, put in their high places by other clowns and lunatics.

King Minno says: "Finda's people are just like the toad, and frog, and raven, for they say a great deal about making good laws, and every one wishes to make regulations (don't we know it!) against misconduct, but does not wish to submit to them himself. Whoever is the most crafty crows over the others, and tries to make them submit to him, till another comes who drives him off his perch." These words might have been written today. He goes on: "The word 'Eva' is too sacred for common use, therefore men have learned to say 'Evin."

"Eva' means that sentiment which is implanted in the breast of every man in order that he may know what is right and what is wrong (here we have both the Divine Soul and Higher Self), and by which he is able to judge his own deeds and those of others; that is, if he has been well and properly brought up. 'Eva' has also another meaning; that is, tranquil, smooth, like water that is not stirred by a breath of wind. If the water is disturbed it becomes troubled, uneven, but it always has a tendency to return to its tranquil condition.

"That is nature, just as the inclination towards justice and freedom exists in Frya's children. We derive this disposition from our Father Wr-alda, which speaks strongly in Frya's children, and will eternally remain so. Eternity is another symbol of Wr-alda, who remains always just and unchangeable. Eternal and unalterable are the signs wisdom and rectitude, which must be sought after by all pious people, and must be possessed by all judges. If, therefore, it is desired to make laws and regulations which shall be permanent, they must be equal for all men. If any crime is committed respecting which no law has been made, a general assembly of all the people shall be called, where judgement shall be pronounced in accordance with the inspiration of Wr-alda's spirit. If we act thus, our judgement will never fail to be right.

"If instead of doing right, men will commit wrong, there will arise quarrels and differences among people and states. Thence arise civil wars, and everything is thrown into confusion and destroyed; and, O foolish people! While you are injuring each other the spiteful Finda's people with their false priests come and attack your ports, ravish your daughters, corrupt your morals, and at last throw the bonds of slavery over every freeman's neck."

minerva
And now we come to some important writings, left by King Minno for the guidance of his people. "When Nyhelennia, whose real name was Min-erva, was well established, and the Krekalanders (Krekaland meaning Magna Grecia as well as Greece) loved her as well as our own people did, there came some princes and priests to her citadel and asked Min-erva where her possessions lay.

"Hellenia answered, I carry my possessions in my own bosom. What I have inherited is the love of wisdom, justice and freedom. If I lose these I shall become as the least of your slaves; now I give advice for nothing, but then I should sell it. The gentlemen went away laughing and saying; Your humble servants, wise Hellenia. But they missed their object, for the people took up this name as a name of honour. When they saw that their shot had missed they began to calumniate her, and to say that she had bewitched the people; but our people and the good Krekalanders understood at once that it was calumny.

"She was once asked, if you are not a witch, what is the use of the eggs that you always carry with you? Min-erva answered; these eggs are the symbols of Frya's counsels, in which our future and that of the whole human race lies concealed. Time will hatch them, and we must watch that no harm happens to them. The priests said, well answered; but what is the use of the dog on your right hand? Hellenia replied: does not the shepherd have a sheepdog to keep his flock together? What the dog is to the shepherd I am in Frya's service. I must watch over Frya's flocks.

"We understand that very well, said the priests; but tell us what means the owl that always sits upon your head, is that light-shunning animal a sign of your clear vision? No, answered Hellenia; he reminds me that there are people on earth who, like him, have their homes in churches and holes, who go about in the twilight, not, like him, to deliver us from mice and other plagues, but to invent tricks to steal away the knowledge of other people, in order to take advantage of them, to make slaves of them, and to suck their blood like leeches.

"Another time they came with a whole troop of people, when the plague was in the country, and said: We are all making offerings to the gods that they may take away the plague. Will you not help to turn away their anger, or have you yourself brought the plague into the land with all your arts? No, said Min-erva; I know no gods that do evil; therefore I cannot ask them to do better. I know only one good spirit, that is Wr-alda's; and as he is good he never does evil.

"Where, then, does evil come from? asked the priests. All the evil comes from you, and from the stupidity of the people who let themselves be deceived by you. If, then your god is so exceedingly good, why does he not turn away the bad? asked the priests. Hellenia answered: Frya has placed us here, and the carrier, that is, Time, must do the rest. For all calamities there is counsel and remedy to be found, but Wr-alda wills that we should search it out ourselves, in order that we may become strong and wise. If we will not do that, he leaves us to our own devices, in order that we may experience the results of wise or foolish conduct. Then a prince said, I should think it best to submit.

"Very possibly, answered Hellenia; for then men would be like sheep, and you and the priests would take care of them, shearing them and leading them to the shambles. This is what our god does not desire, he desires that we should help one another, but that all should be free and wise. That is also our desire, continued Hellenia, and therefore our people choose their princes, counts, councillors, chiefs, and masters among the wisest of the good men, in order that every man shall do his best to be wise and good. Thus doing, we learn ourselves and teach the people that being wise and acting wisely can alone lead to holiness.

"That seems very good judgement, said the priests; but if you mean that the plague is caused by our stupidity, then Nyhellenia will perhaps be so good as to bestow upon us a little of that new light of which she is so proud. Yes, said Hellenia, but ravens and other birds of prey feed only on dead carrion, whereas the plague feeds not only on carrion but on bad laws and customs and wicked passions. If you wish the plague to depart from you and not return, you must put away your bad passions and become pure within and without.

"We admit that the advice is good, said the priests, but how shall we induce all the people under our rule to agree to it? Then Hellenia stood up and said: The sparrows follow the sower, and the people their good princes, therefore it becomes you to begin by rendering yourselves pure, so that you may look within and without, and not be ashamed of your own conduct. Now, instead of purifying the people, you have invented foul festivals, in which they have so long revelled that they wallow like swine in the mire to atone for your evil passions.

"The people began to mock and jeer, so that she did not dare to pursue the subject; and one would have thought that they (the priests and princes) would have called all the people together to drive us out of the land; but no, in place of abusing her they went all about from the heathenish Krekaland to the Alps, proclaiming that it had pleased the Almighty God to send his clever daughter, Min-erva, surnamed Nyhellenia, over the sea in a cloud to give people good counsel, and that all who listened to her should become rich and happy, and in the end governors of all the kingdoms of the earth. They erected statues to her on all their altars, they announced and sold to the simple people advice that she had never given, and related miracles that she had never performed.

"They cunningly made themselves masters of our laws and customs, and by craft and subtlety were able to explain and spread them around. They appointed priestesses under their own care, who were apparently under the protection of Fasta, our first Mother of the Holy Shrines, to watch over the holy lamp; but that lamp they lit themselves, and instead of imbuing the priestesses with wisdom, and then sending them to watch the sick and educate the young, they made them stupid and ignorant, and never allowed them to come out.

"They were employed as advisers, but the advice that seemed to come from them was but the repetition of the behest of the priests. When Nyhellenia died, we wished to choose another mother, and some of us wished to go to Texland to look for her; but the priests, who were all-powerful among their own people, would not permit it, and accused us before the people of being unholy."

At last King Minno and his followers decided to leave Greece, being unable to bear the iniquities of the people and their rulers any longer, and he writes: "When I came away from Athenia with my followers, we arrived at an island named by my crew Kreta, because of the cries that the inhabitants raised on our arrival. When they really saw that we did not come to make war, they were quiet, so that at last I was able to buy a harbour in exchange for a boat and some iron implements, and a piece of land. When we had been settled there a short time, and they discovered that we had no slaves, they were very much astonished; and when I explained to them that we had laws which made everybody equal, they wished to have the same; but they had hardly established them before the whole land was in confusion."

We should explain that the word kreet, plural kreta, means 'cry' in Frisian, and this word has persisted to the present day in the name of the island we still call 'Crete'. The etymology of the word is unknown and first appears in Homer's Odyssey. But this was written 700 years after King Minno arrived in Crete, affording still further proof of the authenticity of the Oera Linda Book. Today we may also hear a Scotsman saying "Och, lassie, don't greet," meaning don't cry. So here we may have an Atlantean word, almost unchanged after thousands of years. King Minno continues:

"The priests and the princes declared that we had excited their subjects to rebellion, and the people appealed to us for aid and protection. When the princes saw that they were about to lose their kingdom, they gave freedom to their people, and came to me to establish a code of laws." How familiar all this sounds today! History is replete with just such accounts of rulers, who grudgingly grant rights to their citizens, much against their will, when their own power and prestige are threatened! So it is not surprising that King Minno next tells us:

"The people, however, got no freedom, and the princes remained masters, acting according to their own pleasure. When this storm had passed, they began to sow divisions among us. They told my people that I had invoked their assistance to make myself permanent king. Once I found poison in my food. So when a ship sailed past, I quietly took my departure. Leaving alone, then, my own adventures, I will conclude this history by saying that we must not have anything to do with Finda's people, wherever it may be, because they are full of false tricks, fully as much to be feared as their sweet wine with deadly poison."

Thus far we have King Minno's own words for what came to pass in Crete when he arrived there, gave them wise laws, and became King of the Cretans for a while. The story is a model of modesty as we're sure you will agree, for he passes by all his own work of administration and so on, and he must have had a very difficult task indeed. One of his laws has it that if a man becomes destitute, his case must be brought before the maidens, the priestesses, that is, so that he may be given aid if he deserves it. But if a man is too lazy to work, then he must be sent out of the country, because, as he tells us: "the cowardly and lazy are troublesome and ill-disposed, therefore they ought to be got rid of."

What a pity we have no such laws today! King Minno gives further laws dealing with persons who commit violence, traitors, and so on, a description of Friesland which we do not have the space to include, leading up to a description by eyewitnesses of how the disaster of that time fell upon Atlantis, and it bears out other descriptions such as we find in The Secret Doctrine. Here it is.

"During the whole summer the sun had been hid behind the clouds, as if unwilling to look upon the earth. There was perpetual calm, and the damp mist hung like a wet sail over the houses and the marshes. The air was heavy and oppressive, and in men's hearts was neither joy nor cheerfulness. In the midst of this stillness the earth began to tremble as if she was dying. The mountains opened to vomit forth fire and flames. Some sank into the bosom of the earth, and in other places mountains rose out of the plain. Aldland (Atlantis), called by the seafaring people Atland, disappeared, and the wild waves rose so high over hill and dale that everything was buried in the sea. Many people were swallowed up by the earth, and others who had escaped the fire perished in the water.

"It was not only in Finda's land that the earth vomited fire, but also in Twiskland (Germany). Whole forests were burned one after the other, and when the wind blew from that quarter our land was covered with ashes (Friesland). Rivers changed their course, and at their mouths new islands were formed of sand and drift.

"During three years this continued, but at length it ceased, and forests became visible (those that remained). Many countries were submerged, and in other places land rose above the sea, and the woods were destroyed through the half of Twiskland. Troops of Finda's people came and settled in the empty places. Our dispersed people were exterminated or made slaves. Then watchfulness was doubly impressed upon us, and time taught us that union was force."

And so the story goes on, and there are many tales of wars, but we cannot give these here, for they have no connection with Atlantis itself, but only with some of those who settled in Friesland after leaving that continent before it was submerged. We learn how after Atlantis sunk there was much suffering on the shores of the Mediterranean, and how the people drifted to and fro, seeking a safe place in which to live.

Here we must end our survey of the Oera Linda Book. We hope you have derived much pleasure and instruction from our discussion of this 'impudent imposture', which, of course, is nothing of the kind! But do study the book for yourself, it is readily available to read online and in some modern reprinted editions, both in hardcover and paperback.