Oera Linda Book
In our afterword to this investigation which is being published in three parts, we examine the laws and customs described in the Oera Linda Book, many of which find their parallel in ancient Egypt, Peru and among the Maya of Central America. From this we may be tolerably sure they reflect the same or similar laws and customs of parts of Atlantis, which the Atlanteans carried with them on their migrations to Europe and the Americas.
The Oera Linda Book is contained in a manuscript of the 13th century, itself a copy of a much older book. The original Frisian text was verified by a Dr. J. O. Ottema, also a Frisian, who made a Dutch translation of the MSS. Later on this was again translated into English by William R. Sandbach, and published in London by the great firm of Trübner & Co in 1876. As we told you in our first article about Atlantis, when the book appeared in English the 'learned' critics of the time called it "an impudent Imposture," whilst most modern scholars call it "a hoax or forgery."

In this, and the next two afterwords, we shall see what truth there is in these criticisms, if any. Let us deal first with the accusation that the book is a hoax or a forgery. In his introduction, Dr Ottema, makes a number of statements which the critics have never satisfactorily refuted. Referring to the original MSS, he tells us that: "The paper, of large quarto size, is made of cotton, not very thick, without watermark or maker's mark, made upon a frame or wire-web, with not very broad perpendicular lines. An introductory letter gives the year 1256 as that in which this manuscript was written by Hiddo overa Linda on foreign paper. Consequently it must have come from Spain, where the Arabs brought into the market paper manufactured from cotton." Similar paper has been found in the Imperial Library of St Petersburg, in Russia, in the oldest Chinese documents held there.

Dr Ottema goes on to say: "In old writings the ink is very black or brown; but while there has been more writing since the thirteenth century, the colour of the ink is often grey or yellowish, and sometimes quite pale, showing that it contains iron. All this affords convincing proof that the manuscript before us belongs to the middle of the thirteenth century, written with clear black letters between fine lines carefully traced with lead. The colour of the ink shows decidedly that it does not contain iron. By these evidences the date given, 1256, is satisfactorily proved, and it is impossible to assign any later date." On the subject of language, he writes: "It is very old Fries, still older and purer than the Fries Rjuchtboek or old Fries laws, differing from that both in form and spelling, so that it appears to be an entirely distinct dialect, and shows that the locality of the language must have been (as it was spoken) between the Vlie and the Scheldt."

One of the most compelling facts for the authenticity of the book is the mention in it of a visit made by the Frisians to the lake-dwelling peoples of Switzerland, who built their houses on wooden piles on the shores of Lake Zurich. These ancient dwellings were not discovered until 1854 when the commune of Meilen took advantage of exceptionally low water levels to start building a harbour on the shore of Lake Zurich, and quite by chance, unearthed a number of odd-looking, superbly preserved ancient artefacts, and a series of wooden poles embedded in the mud. The diggers had found the prehistoric lake village, more than 500 years after the MSS was copied by Hiddo overa Linda.

Another remarkable statement in the book is that in 1550 B.C. Frisians travelled to India under the guidance of a priestess named Geert, and settled in the Punjab, where they adopted the name of Geertmen. This people were known by only one Greek historian—Strabo—who mentions them as 'Germanes', differing totally and entirely from the 'Bruchmanes' (or Brahmins) in manners, language, and religion.

Alexander the Great, in his Indian campaign, which began in 326 B.C., discovered a race of Scythians, that is white men of European origin living in the Punjab. In the maps made by Ptolemy we find at exactly 24°N on the west side of the Indus, the name Minnagara; and a little east of that, at 22°N., another Minnagara. This name is pure Fries and comes from Minna, the name of a Frisian priestess whose history is related in the book.

Perhaps the most damning indictment of the assertion of forgery made against the book, is that the MSS of 1256 is not original, but a copy, as we said earlier. This is proved by the numerous faults in the writing, as well as by some explanations of words which already in the time of the copyist had become obsolete and little known. A still stronger proof is that between pages 157 and 158 one or more pages are missing, which cannot have been lost out of the manuscript, because the pages 157 and 158 are on the front and the back of the same leaf.

Page 157 finishes thus: "Three months afterwards Adel sent messengers to all the friends that he had gained, and requested them to send him intelligent people in the month of May." When we turn over the leaf, the other side begins, "his wife', he said, who had been Maid of Texland, 'had got a copy of it."

There is no connection between these two passages. There is missing, at the very least, the arrival of the invited, and an account of what passed at their meeting. From this it is quite clear that the copyist must have turned over two pages of the original instead of one, which leads to the irrefutable conclusion that there must have been an earlier manuscript, and that it was doubtless written by Liko oera Linda in 803 A.D., as the book tells us.

In our view this is compelling evidence for the book's authenticity. But it is entirely up to the reader to accept or reject it. Those who wish to explore this question further are referred to the aforementioned introduction, which can be read in full online, for we have said all we wish to say on the subject. As for the modern criticisms that the book promotes Nazi ideologies, we might say with considerably greater justification that the Bible promotes even worse ideologies since it has been the cause of untold suffering and evils throughout recorded history and is still used to defend the most iniquitous ideas and incite religious hatred and bigotry today! So let us dismiss this criticism with the contempt it deserves.

Let us rather give the last word to Dr Ottema, who says: "And here we find in our fatherland a very ancient people in possession of development, civilisation, industry, navigation, commerce, literature, and pure elevated ideas of religion, whose existence we had never even conjectured." We agree, but those ideas were hoary with age long before the Oera Linda Book was written, for they are the legacy of Atlantis, carried to every corner of the globe by the survivors of the cataclysms that destroyed it, as we shall now see.

Now in this book it is claimed that the Frisians were once inhabitants of Atlantis, though they do not place Atlantis in the same spot as Plato did, but said that it stretched out far to the west of Jutland, of which Heligoland (German 'Helgoland'—note the similarity to 'holy land'—German 'heiligeland') and the Frisian Isles are the last barren remains. Plato, on the other hand, placed Atlantis beyond the Pillars of Hercules. In the Oera Linda Book we are told that Atlantis, or Atland as the Frisians called their original home, was submerged in 2193 B.C., and that the survivors fled to Friesland and Greece, and that Minerva, or Min-erva and Minos were Atlanteans, and that Min-erva landed with a fleet off Jon, otherwise lona, at the head of a colony in Attica.

In order to discover what sort of civilisation existed in Atlantis, say 10,000 years ago, we need to consider a few of the laws the Frisians brought with them to Friesland in the years after 2193 B.C., according to the record in the Oera Linda Book. Those ancient peoples who arrived from Aldland, or Atland, believed first of all in freedom, and the very name Frisian, means 'Free Man'. They still have their own language and customs today, and these are different in many ways from the rest of the Dutch provinces, of which Friesland is one.

One of their sayings was that 'prosperity awaits the free'. This is a law of their great Goddess, Frya, and she says, "Him only can I recognise as free who is neither a slave to another nor to himself." These are wise words. She further says, "When in dire distress, and when mental and physical energy avail nothing, then have recourse to the spirit of Wr-alda (God); but do not appeal to him before you have tried all other means, for I tell you beforehand, and time will prove its truth, that those who give way to discouragement sink under their burdens." Here we have something with which no priest will agree, yet, in these few words we see a great Law, a wise Law, and a true Law which it would be good to meditate upon.

Frya says: "To God's spirit only shall you give thanks, threefold, for that which you have received in the past; for that which you have today, and for that which you hope for in time of need."

There were three goddesses known to the descendants of the Atlanteans, and they were; Lyda, who was brought forth out of 'fierce heat'; Finda, out of 'strong heat'; and Frya, out of 'moderate heat'. After God, or Wr-alda, had 'breathed his spirit upon them', they came into existence, especially upon Frya, so that she might become a link between God and Man, that the latter might take pleasure and delight in the visions of God, or in other words, that men might behold nature and know it to be God's own creation, for the benefit of all mankind. Each of those goddesses bore twelve sons and twelve daughters, and thence came all mankind.

Now all this, and what follows, is highly symbolical, as we're sure some of our readers will recognise, but it is worth pointing this out to those who know little or nothing of the truths and facts concealed in myths and legends of this kind.

We are next told that the goddess Lyda was black, with hair curled like a lamb, and her eyes shone like stars (a clear reference to the planets of our Solar system), and shot out glances like those of a bird of prey. She was also very acute, could glide about like a snake, and was strong and nimble. She was violent too, and her voice was loud, and when she screamed in anger, every creature quailed. She had no regard for laws, and her actions were governed by her passions, and at last she 'died', turned grey by her own mad behaviour, and heart-broken on account of the wickedness of her children, who accused one another of their mother's death and howled and fought like wolves, while the birds of the air devoured her corpse.

How familiar all this sounds today when the world is ruled by men and women who are slaves to ambition, material power, wealth, fame, and all the rest of the passions of the lowly-evolved!

The second goddess, Finda, was yellow, and her hair was like unto the mane of a horse, and she was so strong that where Lyda killed one lion, she killed ten. She was a most seductive lady, with a voice sweeter than any bird's, and her eyes were alluring and enticing, but whoever looked into them became her slave. She was most unreasonable, wrote thousands of laws, but never obeyed a single one herself. She despised the frankness of the good, and gave herself up to flatterers. She was utterly vain and loved no one but herself, while at the same time she desired that all should love her. Her children were of the same nature, and, no doubt, you have met a few of them here and there—we certainly have! Finda was most treacherous, and died at a ripe old age, but no one knows how she died.

Frya, on the other hand, was as white as snow at sun-rise, and the blue of her eyes vied with the rainbow. She was beautiful, and like the rays of the sun shone her hair, which was as fine as a spider's web. When she opened her eyes, the birds ceased to sing in their astonishment at her beauty, and the leaves quivered not. One glance of her sweet eyes made the lion lie down at her rosy feet, and the adder to withhold his poison. She was pure, and her food was honey, and her beverage the dew gathered from the cups of flowers. She was sensible too, and the first thing she taught her children was self-control, and the second, love of virtue, and when they were grown up she taught them the value of liberty, for she said: "Without the virtue of liberty, all your other virtues serve to make you slaves, and to disgrace your origin." Most happy goddess, for her children clustered about her like unto the hosts of the starry firmament!

Could one wish for a better description of the Mother of All than this? The same Mother Principle that we find in ancient Egypt in the person of Isis. Beautifully concealed in several symbols, here is the Great Mother of our Kosmos, or Solar System, the Lady with the sun and stars around her head and the moon and stars at her feet, from whose womb the manifested life has arisen. Nearly every word of these descriptions of the three goddesses of the Frisians is symbolical of some sacred and hidden Teaching, wonderfully preserved in this manner for the Few who are capable of recognising and comprehending it. What a marvellous and 'impudent imposture' it all is! If we are to believe the ignorant critics mentioned before, which we assuredly do not!

Just before Atlantis was destroyed, Frya sent warning to her own children, who were, of course, the wise ones of Atlantis, who had learnt to open the inner senses, and could see and hear the beauties of the Higher Realms by means of long and careful training in the Occult Sciences, and hear the wise words of the Sages and the Saints above, who speak unto their own on behalf of the Mother of All, here called Frya.

And after she had spoken, "the earth shook like the sea of God. The ground sunk beneath the feet of the Atlanteans, the air was dimmed by tears, and when they looked up to the Mother (those who were not destined to be saved), she was already risen to her watching star. Then, thunder burst from the clouds, and the lightning wrote in fiery letters upon the firmament the word 'Watch!"

The land had now become a sea, all except that part which had not been destroyed, and to which the wise had fled, heeding the warning. They were obedient to the Word of the Mother, and they built a high mount, upon which they erected a strong citadel, and upon its walls they wrote certain words of Wisdom, that they should not be forgotten, and the ones who were bound to come should know and recognise the ancient laws, and teach wisdom to those who desired to listen, just as was done in ancient Egypt, when the Great Pyramid and other sacred buildings were erected by the fugitives who arrived there.

The writers of the Oera Linda Book were rather scandalised that some of the Atlanteans took to their home such peoples as the Laplanders, and the Finns, as far as their womankind was concerned. They do not mention the word 'marriage', but there were offspring of these unions, and these were not always proof that mixed blood produces fine children. So when we read that the Norsemen were pirates and ruthless murderers and thieves, we know how this may be accounted for to some extent.

The taint lasted for many centuries, and even in the ninth century A.D., we hear how the ancient piratical spirit of Greece (to quote one example) was revived among the fierce Danes and Norwegians who led a life of constant rapine and bloodshed; of interminable warfare at home, of frightful devastation abroad.

The old Vikings were not quite so romantic and admirable as many modern historians tell us today. Turner, in his History of the Anglo-Saxons, states that the sea-kings of the north were a race of beings whom Europe beheld with horror. "Without a yard of territorial property," he says, "with no wealth but their ships, no force but their crews, and no hope but from their swords, they swarmed upon the boisterous ocean, and plundered in every district that they could approach. It is said to have been a law in the north that only one male child should be selected to remain at home to inherit the government. The rest were exiled to the ocean, to wield their sceptres amid the turbulent waters.

"The consent of the northern societies entitled all men of royal descent, who assumed piracy as a profession, to enjoy the name of kings, though they possessed no territory. The sea-kings had the same honour, but they were only a portion of those pirates, or Vikings, who in the ninth century were covering the ocean. Not only the children of the kings, but every man of importance equipped ships, and roamed the sea to acquire property by force. Piracy was not only the most honourable occupation and the best harvest of wealth; it was not only consecrated to public estimation by the 'illustrious' ones who pursued it, but no one was esteemed noble, and no one was respected, who did not return in the winter to his home with ships laden with booty."

Thus speaks Turner. All these murderous pirates were the descendants of the 'great' Atlanteans, the mysterious people whom some consider to have been a race of heroes, and sages, and even divine personages. True, there was the admixture of strange blood, but one cannot ascribe everything to this after all. Those Vikings acted very much like the gangs of thugs in all parts of the world today, and it is difficult to find any sort of admiration for such ruthless bullies and murderers if one thinks of the crimes perpetrated since the Second World War in all parts of the world.

Our discussion of the Oera Linda Book is continued in the second part of this investigation.