Psychometry
In this afterword we explain how Joan Grant (1907-1989) came to write Winged Pharaoh and how the powerful narrative of the Weighing of the Heart by the Forty-Two assessors of the Dead was almost not included in it.
For those who have not read the book or our review of it, we should explain that, unlike almost every other novel about ancient Egypt, Winged Pharaoh is the faithful record of a past life, not fiction. The author coined the term 'Far Memory' to describe this supernormal ability. The method she used to exercise it is known to occultists as psychometry. This also requires some explanation.

The word psychometry was invented in 1842 by an American physician Joseph R. Buchanan (1814-1899) to describe the supernormal ability to obtain direct knowledge of events, places and persons from inanimate objects. This is generally done by placing the item believed to be associated with the events, personalities or conditions the psychometrist wishes to get in touch with against the forehead, or in the palm of the hand. In this way it is possible to get in touch with the past or present, as Dr Michaud did to recall a previous life lived in ancient Egypt described in his short story of The Bronze Mirror.

In his Manual of Psychometry published in 1893, Buchanon wrote: "The Past is entombed in the Present! The world is its own enduring monument; and that which is true of its physical, is likewise true of its mental career." The 19th century geologist William Denton (1823-1883) who conducted many psychometric experiments, came to the same conclusion as Buchanon that every particle of matter was imprinted with its environmental history. This is exactly what occult science has known and taught for thousands of years.

Buchanon and Denton believed that psychometry would open up a new and improved science which would allow scientists to explore the true history of man and the earth such as the material sciences of history, archaeology, geology and palaeontology never can. Unsurprisingly, their fond hopes were never realized and today psychometry is dismissed as pseudoscience along with mesmerism, telepathy, clairvoyance and all the other magical arts once known and practised by our wiser ancestors.

Although psychometry is generally regarded as an innate gift possessed only by natural born psychics, we believe it can be acquired by anyone given sufficient training and practise. Having said that, both Dr Michaud and Joan Grant were born with certain psychic abilities, though they still had to learn to refine and control them. In Joan Grant's case this was not an easy process, as we told you in the commentary to our article on Psychicism and Spirituality in which we related some of her horrific visions of the First World War.

Psychometry can be used to obtain knowledge of the history, not only of an object itself, but its origin, successive environments, and of the personalities and events associated with it. How much information is obtained depends on the sensitivity and skills of the investigator. Some psychics are only able to 'tune in' to the object and its past environments; others can go further and recall the appearance and character of the personalities who owned the object and even events in their lives, as Joan Grant recorded in her Far Memory books.

Joan found a particularly rich field of study in the many ancient objects and artefacts held by the British Museum in London. In these investigations Hilary (a friend) was her most faithful and competent scribe. Then as now the larger objects bore prominent notices demanding 'Do not touch' which Joan unsurprisingly ignored! At the same time she kept a wary eye open for keepers, not to mention visitors. The fact that she got any results at all is a testament to her patience and persistence.

On one visit to the Assyrian gallery of the British Museum accompanied by her amanuensis, Hilary, they espied a promising exhibit described as "Winged figure and winged human-headed bull from a doorway in the palace of Sargon, King of Assyria, 721 B.C." After placing her hands on the statue Joan's description was rather more elaborate. She writes.

"This was beside a doorway of a palace at the head of a flight of colossal stone steps. From the foot of the steps stretches an avenue of crouching winged bulls, with a double row of palm trees behind them. Up the avenue a procession of returning warriors approaches. Between their ranks are prisoners who are being lashed with thonged whips, the thongs being tipped with metal. Prisoners who fall down are kicked or goaded. The goads are about eighteen inches long.

"There are bullock carts loaded with treasure. Some of the prisoners are roped to the wheels of the carts. The ropes are so short that they have to bend and then stretch up their arms as the wheels turn. A woman falls and the cart goes over her chest and crushes it. On one of the carts, lashed upright by grass ropes, is a golden cow with a jewelled necklace. It is the size of a calf and has been captured from the temple of the prisoners. They look up to it in despair. It is their god and their hope is gone because they cannot understand why it does not strike down their captors. I am seeing this through the eyes of a soldier who is standing beside this statue at the head of the steps. The scene is very brutal but I am unmoved, as to him it is commonplace.

"Now the prisoners are wailing, 'Hathor the Mighty! Hathor the Omnipotent! Ruler of Water, Ruler of Land. . .' to the gold cow which is now at the foot of the steps. The king comes forth from the palace in a carrying-litter with twelve bearers. The litter is covered with gold beautifully scrolled and has dark red cushions. On each side of it there stand two fan-bearers. The king's crown is high and cylindrical, gold with rows of square jewels or enamel. He has black hair and his beard is elaborately curled. His tunic is red and white with an embroidered pattern like necklaces. He wears rings and armlets and his legs are thronged with jewels. His toe-nails are dyed red and so are his finger-nails, which are very long. When the crowd see him they all bow down. The prisoners begin wailing again, 'Hathor the Mighty! Hathor the Magnificent! We are as the sand beneath thy feet . . .'

"Now the king is giving judgement. The women are to be divided among the soldiers. If the men will not look with reverence upon their conqueror's gods, their eyes shall be put out. If they will not pray to their conqueror's gods, their tongues shall be torn out. If they will not listen to praise of their conqueror's gods, red-hot rods shall be driven into their ears to make them deaf. This sentence was being put into effect when we were interrupted by a conducted party, and I was glad of an excuse not to have to see any more."

Those of you who may have been thinking how 'cool' it would be to recall the past now know why so few are born with the 'gift' of psychometry and even fewer develop it to the extent that Joan Grant did. Like every other psychic ability, it is often more of a curse than a blessing as we learned in a previous article about Psychicism and Spirituality in which we discussed Joan Grant's clairvoyant visions. We also touched on these dangers in our seventh Astral Conversation on the cruel charade of Channeling in which we told you about Joan Grant's encounters with the witch, Sofia who allowed her body to be possessed by demons.

In Winged Pharaoh—the first of Joan Grant's Far Memory novels—she tells us about her birth, life and death as a female Pharaoh of the First Dynasty. We might more correctly call the book an autobiography for that is what it is, though it is only fair to say that her later books lack the innocent purity which shines forth from Winged Pharaoh, perhaps because she was then short of cash and under pressure from her publishers to keep writing!

As we said at the beginning of this afterword, Joan's moving recital of the Negative Confession was almost left out of the book! Here, then is the amazing story of how this priceless record of the past was almost lost. It all began one very wet day in September 1936 when Joan, her second husband Leslie and her friends Daisy and Elfie Sartorius were confined indoors by the rain. They had just finished a jigsaw puzzle when Leslie suggested Joan should do some psychometry. After further discussion it was discovered that Daisy possessed five Egyptian scarabs inherited from her dead brother and agreed that Joan should try to psychometrize them.

The scarabs were placed in a row on a table beside Joan. Two were white, one green, one dark brown and the fifth, turquoise blue. Joan relates what happened next in her autobiography Time out of Mind. "The two white scarabs were genuine but of no interest. They were probably new when they were included in the mummy bandages. The green one had been charged as an amulet by an efficient priest in the reign of Thothmes I, to prevent a little boy from having nightmares, or rather from remembering his dreams too clearly; which would appear as nightmares to the mind of a child.

"It worked too," relates Joan, adding: "Unfortunately it was specifically made so that the virtue would only last for six years so that it would not interfere with the boy developing dream-memory when he was old enough to do so. A pity otherwise it might have come in handy for Gillian if she starts being frightened like I used to be." Gillian was Joan Grant's eldest daughter.

The brown scarab revealed that Egyptian temples in the time of Ramesses II were presided over by "men without virtue, wearing priestly robes." Joan narrates that the scarab had been bought by a man for "five she-goats in milk" and was supposed to be a protection against a plague of flies, adding: "The flies were a little larger than bees and had two white bands on the thorax, which although they do not bite nor sting are so numerous that they cover a sleeping man like a black pall and smother him to death. And if he opens his mouth to speak or to eat they crawl into his mouth and choke him."

Sadly, like those who look to 'magic' to cure their ills and solve their problems today, the poor man was duped. Asked what more she could see Joan put the brown scarab to her forehead again and identified so closely with it that she relived the emotions of the owner and experienced his fury at being so gullible as to part with five of his best goats for a scarab which was only a scarab. "I'm sorry," she said, "I can't get any more. The man only kept it for two days and then flung it on the midden in disgust."

Finally, the turquoise-blue scarab was put into her hand and her life would never be the same again. She writes: "The moment it touched my forehead I knew it was warm and lively. This is much older than any of the others. It was taken from the mummy of a priestess. . . . Leslie, do you remember the underground tomb we went to at Saqqara, the one with three drop-stones in the entrance passage to the inner chamber shaped like a Noah's Ark? It wasn't a tomb. It was a place where rememberers, priests of Anubis, were taken for their initiation. The place I am seeing is not the one we went to but is very like it."

Suddenly afflicted with a sensation of intense cold, she paused, was covered in a warm rug, and continued. "This did not come off a mummy. I thought she was a mummy because she is dressed as though ready for burial, for this symbolises that her spirit is as free to travel in search of wisdom as though her earth-body had released it. . . ."

For over an hour Joan Grant held her audience spellbound as she related what she was seeing; how a girl called Sekeeta was taken from a temple to undergo the ordeal of initiation, during which she must leave her body for four days and four nights, returning at the end of the fourth day to dictate to a scribe what she had experienced. Here we have proof that what Herodotus and others wrote about the ancient Egyptian trials of initiation is accurate.

Joan told her husband and friends there was so much more locked up inside the little blue scarab. That 'more' became the heart and soul of her first, and in our view, greatest novel—Winged Pharaoh. The book went on to sell more than 500,000 copies, much to the astonishment of Arthur Barker, Joan Grant's publisher. But what happened before publication was even more astonishing!

At the eleventh hour, when the book was about to go to press Joan suddenly felt an unmistakable and irresistible intimation that there was something more to come. "No!" Arthur Barker protested. "The book is finished. You will be getting the last batch of galleys next week. You can't ask me to put in any more."

But Joan was in no mood to obey. "Shut up and don't argue," she told him. In less than an hour she had dictated the whole of the Negative Confession reproduced in our article at left. Her friend Vera took it all down in shorthand, her pencil flying across the paper to keep up with Joan. "Splendid stuff," said Barker enthusiastically. "It has got to go in." Shortly afterwards the excited publisher read the completed narrative to his printer over the telephone.

Was it worth holding up publication to add the Negative Confession to the book? We are in no doubt it was. It is noteworthy that it was added to chapter seven of Part seven. Seven, as you can read in our article on the science of numbers, was the sacred number par excellence among all the civilised nations of antiquity. The Forty-Two Assessors of the Dead comprise the Hexad and the Heptad, or six time seven, adding up to 42. If we add a further 7 to this we get 49, or 7 x 7. Coincidence? We think not! Let us explain this numerological puzzle.

If we regard the number 42 as a concealed reference to the number six (4 + 2) this gives us the five senses of man plus the lower self or mind. If we then add the Higher Self, which occultists regard as a septenary being active on seven levels or planes of consciousness, we obtain the number 49. We may conclude from this that it is the Higher Self which judges itself (the 42 judging the 7). This is just what we said in our article.

If this brief analysis encourages you to investigate the science of numbers further by yourself, as well as the rich mine of Wisdom to be found in the Egyptian ritual of the Judgement of the Dead, we can promise you many happy hours of profitable discovery.