Sermon on the Mount
In this afterword I examine the esoteric truths concealed in the Sermon on the Mount.
The Sermon on the Mount—known as the Beatitudes—has been the source of inspiration, comfort and guidance to ordinary men and women for nearly two thousand years and remains a beacon of hope and solace for millions to this day. But there is very much more concealed in these teachings than the obvious and literal one, and it is the purpose of this afterword to uncover the great occult truths it contains.

The Sermon on the Mount consists of verses 3-11 in chapter 5 of the Gospel of Matthew which begin with the word 'blessed', which itself has a deeper meaning as we shall see as I develop my theme. But the nine verses which form the Beatitudes are really eight, since verse 11 is a recapitulation of verse 10. Some scholars think this has been added from Isaiah 51:7. I agree and incline to the view that it may have been interpolated to bolster the Church's dogma that the historical Jesus was the only begotten Son of God, rather than a son of God, as we all are, or daughters of God, if we are female. But before we consider the hidden meaning of the Beatitudes, it is necessary to see what we can discover about their origins.

Origins
As I discussed in my article on the Sayings of the Saviour, no one knows for certain when the Gospel of Matthew was written or by whom. This applies to the Sermon on the Mount too. Some scholars believe it is derived from a hypothetical collection of sayings referred to simply as 'Q', from the German Quelle, meaning source. This theory is based on the fact that the eight Beatitudes in Matthew are broadly similar to the Sermon on the Plain found in verses 20-22 in chapter 6 the Gospel of Luke.

"And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake."

Other scholars dispute this theory, citing the absence of such sayings in the Gospel of Mark as evidence that each sermon was composed independently of the other. Given the similarity between them, this seems unlikely to me. A more reasonable hypothesis is that the 'Q' source provided the basic framework for the two sermons and that each was rearranged to suit the intentions of the compiler, or compilers. For it is noteworthy that the Sermon on the Mount is imparted to the chosen disciples of Jesus on the mountain, whereas the Sermon on the Plain was delivered to the multitude assembled below it. I shall return to this important distinction later on.

It is the close similarity between many passages in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke which led 19th century scholars to posit the prior existence of a common source used in both—the aforementioned 'Q'. This is posited on two main grounds. Firstly, the congruence between many passages in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke. Secondly, the non-canonical Gospel of Thomas, which I mentioned in my investigation of the Mystery of Jesus at left. The book consists of the Logia of the Lord, that is, sayings attributed to Jesus, sometimes as standalone statements and sometimes contained in short dialogues or parables. The Gospel of Thomas was well-known to many of the early Fathers of the Church, and is mentioned by Hippolytus of Rome and Origen.

In the 4th century, Cyril of Jerusalem mentions a 'Gospel of Thomas' twice in his Catechesis, warning his readers that: "Let none read the Gospel according to Thomas: for it is the work not of one of the twelve Apostles, but of one of the three wicked disciples of Manes." Manes or Mani was a Persian prophet who founded the so-called 'heretical' sect of Manichaeism which was one of many threats to the emerging Christian Church from the third to seventh centuries of our era.

Cyril, being a fanatical pillar of the early Church, was naturally opposed to anything that smacked of the hated Pagan Mysteries. Hence, he had every reason to discourage the 'faithful' from reading the Gospel of Thomas which bears the unmistakable stamp of the Wisdom Teachings of ancient Egypt, as I said in my article. From this it seems quite clear to me that the Beatitudes are a genuine, if fragmentary and distorted copy of the Secret Sermon of Hermes in the Mount of Regeneration found in Book Seven of The Divine Pymander. Needless to add, this is not a view shared by Theologians or Biblical scholars. The sole exception being Gerald Massey, whose writings I have referred to in several previous articles, and who did so much to show that the historical figure of Jesus is a faithful copy of the Mythical Christ.

The Beatitudes
Before I come to analyse the eight Beatitudes themselves, let us look at the verses which precede them. "And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples came unto him, and he opened his mouth, and taught them. . ." (Matthew 5:1-2). There are several important things to note in these two seemingly simple verses if we are to get at the occult, or hidden sense of the Sermon on the Mount. Jesus did not deliver this teaching to the multitudes, for they remained at the foot of the 'mountain', whereas he ascended to the top, and there imparted his teaching to his chosen, pledged disciples in secret.

This 'mountain', 'mount', 'hill' or mountains occurs many times in the gospels, where it is always a metaphor for the 'holy mount', to which every teacher of the Eternal Verities both retires to, and teaches from, during the course of his mission. Here we have a concealed reference to the higher realms or worlds of Light to which all such teachers belong and from whence they descend to earth to fulfil their mission.

The 'multitudes', on the other hand, receive that message of the teacher in the form of parables, for they lack the ability to ascend to the mountain top, being young in evolution as well as in experience. Not that this is any slur on their worthiness, or some form of spiritual 'elitism' on behalf of the teacher, whether Jesus, or any other. It is simply a universal law of life, which Jesus himself refers to, as we may read in Matthew 13:13: "Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand." But to his chosen disciples, those who are capable and ready to hear the great truths, Jesus says: "But blessed are your eyes, for they see: and your ears, for they hear" (Matthew 13:16). This is the occult meaning of those three verses, which are not so simple after all!

It is for these reasons that the profound sayings which comprise the Beatitudes are very commonly misunderstood. They are generally interpreted as a series of moral maxims with a kind of promise attached to each, but with no suggestion of how or why each particular promise is to be fulfilled. The purpose of this afterword is to fill in these gaps by demonstrating that these eight verses are really statements about the spiritual universe and its laws, which tell us what must inevitably come to pass through cause and effect. Laws which we neglect to our real peril and follow to our real gain. Laws that reveal what is positive, which in most cases is what the masses—both then and now—would consider negative.

Those of you who know somewhat of the science of numbers will have noted that these important teachings are found in chapter 5 of the Gospel of Matthew. The number five was considered of peculiar value by the Pythagoreans who called it 'Equilibrium' and 'the Privation of Strife,' because it unites in friendship the even and odd numbers two and three and divides the perfect number of ten—the Tetractys—into two equal parts.

Five was also used as an amulet or talisman to ward of evil, and the Greek Mysteries were divided into five parts, the last and most awesome of which was described as 'friendship and interior communion with God' by Theon of Smyrna. As I have mentioned in my previous articles, numbers are an important key to unlocking the hidden meaning in the Bible, so it is not unreasonable to conjecture that the inclusion of the Sermon on the Mount in the fifth chapter of Matthew is no accident.

But this is by the way. Let us now consider the individual Beatitudes in the order they appear in the Gospel of Matthew to see what we can discover within them, over and above their obvious and literal meaning. Each begins with the word 'blessed'. This requires some explanation, for there is more in this simple promise than meets the eye. To be "blessed" is a synonym for moving upward on the Path to the Light, the path to wisdom, leading to the spiritual realms on high.

1. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Contrary to what you may have been taught or read, the 'poor in spirit' are not the destitute and poverty-stricken of this world, for they may have brought these misfortunes on themselves through the choices made in this or a previous life. Nor are the poor-spirited meant, those lacking in initiative and courage. Not even those who are poor in spiritual life, but those whose minds are non-possessive. This verse defines our whole attitude to things and persons. What we have does not matter at all. If we can attain to this 'detachment' as some mystics call it, we shall inevitably attain to the freedom of Heaven: we shall enjoy that mental and spiritual freedom which belongs to the Higher Realms of Light. Acquisitiveness, whether it shows itself on a large scale as aggression, or in a mean way as greed and jealousy, is negative and retards our evolution. Non-possessiveness is positive and places our feet firmly on the Path to the Light.

2. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Earthly life consists of a series of tests and trials which bring 'mourning'. Grievous things happen to us and to our families, especially in a time of war. It is easy to rebel, or to shrink from such sufferings and sorrows or be overcome by them, as so many are. But this is negative. The positive attitude is to accept all such trials, such 'mourning', gladly. They are a sign that we are accepted as worthy of special discipline, and that as surely as day follows night we shall be 'comforted'—that is, we shall receive a fuller measure of that inner Peace which lies on the Path to the Light.

3. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.
Not the weak or the lazy, still less those who are too timid and fearful to fight the battles of life, but the humble is meant here. Those who have got beyond all desire for admiration and approbation, in whom personal pride has ceased to exist altogether—they are on the positive upward path. Humility shows an intelligent appreciation of the wisdom and goodness of God, who alone can bestow on us that of which many in their blind stupidity, are so proud, for all self-esteem is the result of ignorance and negative thinking. Therefore only the truly humble 'shall inherit the earth.' This has three possible interpretations:

Firstly, 'earth' stands for the spiritual realm depicted in Vision 6 of The Golden Star, which is truly a higher 'earth' which is the rightful inheritance of the meek as a reward for their labours in this vale of tears and broken dreams. Secondly, the meek are those who exert an influence for good in the history of the earth, though they may be quite unknown and unappreciated by the mass of humanity. Thirdly, it is the meek who may eventually evolve to take a share in planetary rule, as the authors of this website suggest in their afterword on the true destiny of man in their article on Evolution.

4. Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.
The meaning of this is obvious and twofold. Firstly, it is only the sincere aspirants to Wisdom and Truth who shall attain these blessings. This attainment is not a mere pious promise, but the inevitable result of the Hermetic Law of Cause and Effect. Secondly, their influence will be so beneficial that they will be filled with the joy of leading others along the 'righteous' or upward path, for they are not seeking their own righteousness only, but righteousness as a universal condition for all mankind.

5. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
The merciful and the tolerant, they who look on the weaknesses, prejudices, stupidities and even the wickedness of others with a real tolerance, knowing that they themselves have once been there, possibly far back down the path, shall obtain mercy when they need it. Again, this is not an optimistic promise but a statement of fact in accordance with universal spiritual laws. To the merciful will come the same tolerance from the more fully developed, for the barriers are down which intolerance unconsciously but most surely raises, and nothing now bars the way to the inflow and outflow of 'mercy' in all its forms.

6. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
The pure in heart are those who have no 'axe to grind'—whose relationships with other people are completely clear, not only in the matter of moral chastity (though that of course is included in this Beatitude), but in any kind of contact. They neither expect nor derive any return for the service they render, not even thanks or recognition. Being pure in heart they are completely free from any bondage to the lower self and all their thoughts and acts are guided by the 'still, small, voice' which receives its inspiration from the ever-watchful Soul. To these alone comes clear sight of the divine, for their Higher Self is at one with their Soul, and they attain the vision of things as they truly are, not as they appear to the erring senses, finally reaching right through to the glory and mystery of God Himself.

7. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the Sons of God.
This is perhaps the grandest and most profound of all the Beatitudes. The real peacemakers among men are not those who sit in the United Nations! Nor are they those who make up quarrels between individuals or even nations, but those whose whole being radiates Inner Peace. Disharmony dies away in their presence, feelings of irritation subside, worry and anxiety are banished, and nobody quite knows why. It is, of course, because the peaceful vibrations are so strong that they overcome and disperse all discordant conditions.

Such men and women are the true Sons and Daughters of God, whether they are in the most humble positions on earth, or great messengers sent from the Higher Realms to teach and guide humanity in its path of more or less blind existence. Their whole being is creative and positive. But before that can radiate peace to others they all have had to learn to make peace in themselves first.

8. Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
The test of sincerity is opposition. Those who can stand being persecuted, pursued and harried by the powers of darkness, sometimes in the most subtle and sometimes in the most blatant way, whether through the thoughts and deeds of their fellow human beings or through the evil machinations of the dark elementals, and still walk steadily upwards on the Path to the Light, to them of course belongs Heaven's high Kingdom. They cannot miss it, for their way to it lies straight and true before them at all times.

We have now seen that rather than being an exclusively Christian teaching, the Beatitudes are an epitome of the eternal spiritual laws of the Universe which every man and woman may follow regardless of their religious beliefs.

Here, in these eight verses, is a 'noble eight-fold path' as grand and sublime as anything taught by the Buddha, whose life and teachings the authors of this website discussed in their series of articles on Tibetan Buddhism. As such, I commend these grand Beatitudes to all my readers for careful meditation and study.