The Life and Teachings of Pythagoras

In this afterword to our main article at left, we briefly examine the life and teachings of Pythagoras, one of the last great initiates in Europe
Pythagoras was born around 570 B.C., on the island of Samos at a time when the institution of the Mysteries was already in decline. The old sacerdotal royalty in Greece was succeeded either by tyranny, military aristocracy, or by anarchical democracy, each of which was as bad as the other. The few temples that remained had become powerless to check the materialism, greed and hedonism, which then as now, were rampant at all levels of society. A new Messenger was needed who would restore, to some extent, the true Teachings and rekindle the sacred flame of the ancient Wisdom. That messenger was Pythagoras. Very little is known of his life and only fragments remain of his teachings.

The main reason for this was the terrible persecution of the Samian Sage which cost him and his pupils their lives. Some were crushed to death beneath the ruins of their burning schools, others died of starvation. The Master's memory and teaching were only perpetuated by the few survivors who were able to escape into Greece. Pythagoras, like the British Druids, never committed his esoteric teachings to writing, but communicated them orally in the form of symbols and secret characters. The fragmentary remains of his system and teachings have come down to us in the Golden Verses, the commentary of Hierocles, the fragments of Philolaus and in the Timaeus of Plato, which contains the cosmogony of Pythagoras.

The most authentic and complete record of the life and teachings of Pythagoras was compiled by Iamblichus, a Syrian Greek philosopher who flourished in the 3rd century A.D., whose exposition of the ancient Egyptian Mystery Teachings On the Mysteries we review and recommend on our books page. Iamblichus tells us that the young Pythagoras possessed the virtues of simplicity, modesty and humility, was wise beyond his years, and free from the vices of hypocrisy and pride that characterised his contemporaries.

At the age of eighteen he had already mastered all the teachings of the schools to be found on Samos and conferred with the great philosophers Thales and Anaximander at Miletus. These masters opened out new horizons for his enquiring mind, though none fully satisfied him, for he failed to find the unity of all things in their contradictory teachings.

How familiar this sounds, and how typical it is of the lives of all the great initiates, every one of whom had to wade through an ocean of unwisdom before they arrived at the sea of Truth which would illuminate and direct their future work on behalf of mankind.

Pythagoras had heard of the great wisdom of Egypt and how the occult sciences were still preserved in the temples of the Nile by those who presided over the Sublime Mysteries of the Gods. He obtained a letter of recommendation to Ahmes, the ruler of Egypt during the 26th Dynasty. So we may say that he was born at just the right time to benefit from what remained of the great Wisdom of Egypt—wisdom already hoary with age in the 5th century B.C.

The Pharaoh introduced the young philosopher to the priests of Memphis, who at first were strongly opposed to receiving the foreigner whom they distrusted along with all Greeks for their fickleness and inconstancy. But the priests quickly recognised his extraordinary courage, humility and selfless longing for wisdom, and opened out to him the treasures of their learning. It took him 22 long years of constant study to master the sacred sciences of mathematics, numbers, and the universal laws and principles of occult science, which he formulated anew and made the centre of his own system. The severity of the Egyptian discipline deeply impressed him with the prodigious power of the human will when wisely trained and rightly directed.

And so Pythagoras attained the gnosis of the ancient Egyptian Wisdom, and was preparing to return to Greece to begin his mission when war, with all its attendant horrors and misery, burst upon the valley of the Nile. The despots of Asia had long been planning the ruin of Egypt. For centuries past their repeated attacks had been repulsed by the wisdom and power of the Egyptian priesthood and the energy of mighty Pharaohs. But the Golden Age of Hermes was over, the great cycles of time now ushered in a new age of darkness, and the army of Cambyses descended upon Egypt like a cloud of ravening locusts, devoid of mercy and eager for conquest, spoils and plunder.

Cruel and hard are the bitter lessons which are unleashed on mankind at times, so that the good might profit from contact with evil, and evil take a step forward in their evolution from darkness to light. Cambyses took Pythagoras to Babylon and kept him prisoner there for twelve years. But the Samian philosopher put his captivity to good use by studying the secret sciences of the Persian Magi, the heirs of the great Sage Zoroaster. He was now able to compare the different religions, and discovered, as others had before him, and would do so in the future, that they were all rays of the same Truth, reflected and refracted through the prism of the minds of men, providing each with that which was most appropriate for their different degrees of intelligence and evolution.

After an absence of 34 years Pythagoras returned to Samos, and thence journeyed to southern Italy, where he founded his famous school in the Achaean colony of Croton (modern Crotone, in Calabria). He was no longer young yet only just beginning his mission as a Teacher of the Mysteries!

How different this is from those modern 'initiates' we discussed in our article at left who, after a few short years of skimming through a few 'occult' books and perhaps a very brief sojourn in some occult group or other, set up 'mystery schools' teaching those who know even less than themselves. But let that pass. . .

On his arrival, Iamblichus tells us that Pythagoras' eloquent discourse turned all the young people away from a life of debauchery and idleness. He even persuaded the young women to part with their golden robes and ornaments to celebrate the defeat of vanity and luxury. This must have been just as difficult a feat then as it would be now!

Needless to add, this did not go down well with the rulers of the city, and the senate of Croton summoned Pythagoras to explain his conduct and the means he was using to so radically influence the minds and behaviour of the people. This gave him the opportunity to develop his ideas on education and demonstrate that, far from threatening the stability of Croton, they would only strengthen it. When he had won over the wealthiest of the citizens and the majority of the senate, he proposed that they should found an institute for himself and his disciples. Young men should be admitted to the lessons of the masters and to the different grades of initiation according to their intelligence or earnestness in study, under the control of the head of the order.

Thus was founded the famous school of Croton, within whose sacred precincts were taught the occult sciences. Pythagoras' well-known aphorism "that not every kind of wood is suitable for the making of Mercury" exemplifies how strictly he controlled admission to his school. All applicants were obliged to undergo a period of test and trial. Only after this would the candidate be admitted to the first degree or grade of the Teachings. This lasted from two to five years, during which the neophytes were subjected to the rule of absolute silence. There then followed in order the higher grades. The many subjects studied in these grades included geometry, architecture, music, art, astronomy, medicine, cosmogony and the sacred science of numbers. The latter, by the way, had nothing to do with the modern pseudo-science of numerology as it is popularly taught, but with the hidden meaning of numbers and their properties, as you can read in our article on this much misunderstood subject.

Pythagoras taught that each number enshrined a Divine principle, law or universal force, and that the essential principles are all contained within the first four numbers, symbolised by the famous 'Tetractys', since the remainder are formed by addition or multiplication. This echoes the Hermetic doctrine that "all is number, derived from no-number." Pythagoras further taught that the Monad acts as a creative Dyad. All manifestation proceeds from the Dyad, which combines the animating, masculine principle with the passive, feminine principle. Accordingly the Dyad represents the union of the Father-Mother God, which is in complete accord with the occult teachings the Samian Sage learned in the Temples of Egypt.

At the age of sixty, Iamblichus tells us Pythagoras married Theano, thus disproving the accepted dogma that initiates must remain celibate. We know almost nothing of their life together and not wishing to speculate, must pass over this time in the philosopher's life and conclude this afterword. But before we do so, we cannot resist quoting one anecdote attributed to Pythagoras' wife which should appeal to all our regular readers. One day Theano was asked what length of time should elapse before a woman was pure again after intercourse with a man. The Sage's wife replied: "If it is with her husband, she is pure all the time; if with another man, she is never pure." Religious bigots please take note!

Pythagoras lived and taught in Croton for thirty years, during which time his teachings spread rapidly throughout the whole of Southern Italy, reaching even the Etruscans. His influence on the government of the rich and mighty cities of Italy was profound. Wherever he appeared, order, justice and concord were restored. Once, when summoned into the presence of a tyrant of Sicily, he persuaded him, by his eloquence alone, to restore the wealth he had unjustly acquired and to abdicate a power he had usurped. Such towns as were subject to one another he made independent and free. Sadly, such a happy state of affairs could not last in those turbulent times.

The inevitable reaction set in when the indefatigable initiate reached the ripe old age of ninety. It began in Sybaris, the rival of Croton, where an uprising took place and the aristocratic party was overthrown. Five hundred exiles asked the inhabitants of Croton to receive them, but the Sybarites demanded their extradition. Dreading retaliation, the rulers of Croton were on the point of complying with this demand when Pythagoras intervened. At his entreaty, they refused to hand over the unhappy suppliants to their implacable enemies, whereupon Sybaris declared war upon Croton and was soundly defeated. The disorder that followed culminated in the rise to power of an ex-pupil of the Sage called Cylon, who had been ejected from the order and harboured a bitter animosity toward his erstwhile Master.

The age-old story of the disciple who betrays his master now played itself out, to be repeated 500 years later in Palestine. The end came swiftly on a day when the principal members of the order were gathered together in the home of one of their number. The house was surrounded by an enraged mob, who set fire to the building, which was soon engulfed in flames. Thirty-eight students, constituting the flower of the order, along with Pythagoras himself, perished in the conflagration.

So passed the Soul of the mighty Sage from the world, to return to his own people on High. His murder was the signal for a 'democratic' revolution in Croton and the surrounding towns. Throughout Italy, the unfortunate disciples of the Master were hunted down and hounded from their schools and homes. Many were murdered, the rest went into hiding.

Yet the Divine Truths Pythagoras laboured to communicate lived on in the hearts and minds of those philosophers who came after him, such as Plato, Socrates, Proclus, Iamblichus and many more. Those same Truths live on in the mind and heart of the author of this afterword, who hopes that these few inadequate words have revealed something of the grandeur, wisdom and sublimity of the life and teachings of this truly great initiate. We end this brief review with one of the Golden Verses attributed to the Greek Sage which sum up the essence of his teachings in a few lines:

"I would have thee know that men draw their own misfortunes upon themselves of their own free will and their own free choice. Unhappy wretches all! They neither see nor understand that their God is near to them. Few know how to deliver themselves from their misfortunes. Such is the fate that blinds a man and takes away his sense. Like helpless leaves driven by the winds of their passions, they roll to and fro, always oppressed with ills innumerable. For fatal strife, innate, pursues them everywhere, tossing them up and down; nor do they perceive the causes of it."