The historical Jesus and the mythical Christ
In his afterword, John Temple examines the real origins of Christianity and its close connection with the wisdom teachings of ancient Egypt.
I am deeply indebted for some of the content of this afterword to an essay bearing the same title written by Gerald Massey. Those who wish to know more about this greatly underrated scholar are referred to the Links page of this website for further information.

H. P. Blavatsky held Massey in high esteem for his meticulous scholarship and unswerving devotion to the search for Truth, and she quotes copiously from his writings in The Secret Doctrine. In building on his work I have endeavoured to shine a clearer light upon those mysteries which he laboured to reveal whilst correcting some of his mistranslations of ancient Egyptian papyri and the misconceptions arising from them.

But this is in no way intended as a criticism of Massey's scholarship, which remains unequalled in its depth and verisimilitude. When he erred he did so for two very good reasons. Firstly, because he was not an Occultist and so lacked the training without which it is impossible to fully elucidate the Mystery Teachings of the ancient Egyptians. Secondly, because the science of Egyptology was still in its infancy when he wrote his essay in 1888. At that date neither E. A. Wallis Budge's translation of the Papyrus of Ani (published in1895) or his Egyptian hieroglyphic dictionary (published in 1920) were available to him.

As I mention in my investigation at left, the teachings of Jesus set down in the Bible have been drawn in large part from the wisdom teachings of ancient Egypt. Gerald Massey did more than anyone before him in investigating these parallels and the relationship the historical person of Jesus bears to the Christ principle we find embodied in Osiris, Horus and the saviours of many different religions from around the world.

For we are in search of Truth in these investigations, not speculation, religious dogma or fantasy. Those who prefer the latter may stop reading now, for nothing I have to say is likely to dispel their cherished beliefs. Nor is it my intention to persuade or 'convert' such readers, who are fully entitled to their beliefs, whatever they may be. Those, on the other hand, who possess an open and enquiring mind and are dissatisfied by the teachings of the Church about Jesus, will welcome the clarifying light these researches shed upon the subject.

This leads on to a question many people have asked me over the years: was there ever such a Teacher as Jesus was represented to be—as an earthly man? My personal view is that there probably was a great Teacher named Jesus—a very common name in those days—around whom the gospel narratives were later woven. He was probably an Essene—a strict Jesus sect—and he may have shared the fate of other martyrs who spread the Word of Light; or tried to do so.

But despite the very latest research and a mountain of books there is no actual proof of any of this, no matter what some scholars and writers may claim, and as I have no wish to add to the speculations surrounding this subject there I must leave it for the moment, though I intend to return to this question in a future article in this series. Madame Blavatsky neatly sums up the enigma of the historical Jesus and his relation to the Mythical Christ with her customary acuity in her Collected Writings, Vol. IX, pages 203-225:

"Jesus is a deified personification of the glorified type of the great Hierophants of the Temples, and his story, as told in the New Testament, is an allegory, assuredly containing profound esoteric truths, but still an allegory. . .Every act of the Jesus of the New Testament, every word attributed to him, every event related of him during the three years of the mission he is said to have accomplished, rests on the programme of the Cycle of Initiation, a cycle founded on the precession of the equinoxes and the Signs of the Zodiac."

The use of the word 'mythical' is not intended to suggest that Christ did not or does not exist. As Blavatsky tells us, he is a personification of the character and deeds of every Messenger who has ever, or will ever bless this earth with their holy presence. Each of these messengers is overshadowed by, and enacts the will of the Christ principle, who is the third person of the true Divine trinity of Father, Mother and ever-coming Son. Ever-coming, because there is literally no end to these messengers, whose births and lives all share the same characteristics, as I discussed in my investigation of the Nativity.

The mythical Christ was never human, nor can he be, no matter how many corpses are nailed to wooden crosses. He is the allegorical prototype of the Universal Saviour of whom the historical Jesus was the earthly representative.

Massey shows us that the Church's dogma of the virgin birth was directly copied from the ancient Egyptian mythos in which Queen Mut-em-ua, who flourished some 3,600 years ago, is represented as giving birth to the future Pharaoh, Amenhetep III, without human intervention. As we can be tolerably sure that the ancient Egyptians knew quite as much about sexual reproduction as we do, we may safely say that they intended this portrayal to be allegorical not literal.

This virgin birth can still be seen depicted upon the walls of the Holy of Holies within the temple of Amen-Ra at Thebes. The first scene shows Thoth, the Scribe of the Gods, in the act of hailing the Virgin Queen, and announcing to her that she is to give birth to the coming son. In the second scene the god Khnum accompanied by the Goddess Hathor breathe life into the babe. In the transposition of Egyptian mystery into historical fact these two deities have been merged into one by the Church in the form of the Holy Ghost.

In the third scene we behold the Queen seated on the birthing stool with the newborn child supported by one of the wet-nurses. The fourth scene is that of the Adoration of the new-born King. Here the child receives homage from the gods and gifts from men. We even find the Wise Men kneeling beside the child in the guise of worshippers, bearing presents in their left hands and extending the gift of life with their right in the form of the sacred ankh. So now you know where the Wise men were 'borrowed' from!

The child thus announced, incarnated, born and worshipped, was the pharaonic representative of Iu-em-Hetep, which name means 'Prince of Peace', the ever-coming Son of his Father, which was Amen-Ra in one phase of the Egyptian mythos and Ptah in another, both emblematical of the Heavenly Father, as Mut-em-ua was emblematical of the Virgin Mother of the Gods—Hathor. These scenes, which were mythical in Egypt, have been faithfully reproduced as historical in the canonical gospels, where Jesus is also called the 'Prince of Peace', showing his identity with Iu-em-Hetep and the correspondence between the two different narratives.

Casini, the French astronomer, demonstrated that the date assigned for the birth of the Christ is an astronomical epoch in which the conjunction of the moon with the sun happened on the 24th March at the meridian of Jerusalem, the very day of the Vernal or Spring Equinox. The following day (the 25th) was the day of the Incarnation, according to Augustine, but the date of the birth, according to Clement Alexander. For two birth days are assigned to Jesus by the early Church Fathers, one at the Winter Solstice, the other at the Vernal or Spring Equinox.

As they cannot both be historical, we are compelled to conclude that they were copied from the two birthdays of the double Horus in Egypt. For, as you will recall from my previous investigations, there were two Horuses in Egyptian theology. One was the tender child of twelve years with his finger in his mouth, signifying that he spoke in parables, and the other, the adult Horus of thirty years who came to avenge Osiris and wage war upon the powers of darkness.

Plutarch tells us that Isis was delivered of Horus the child around the time of the Winter Solstice whereas the festival of the adult Horus followed the Vernal Equinox. Hence, the two seasons of the year, one in December and the other in March, were both assigned to the historical birth of Jesus by the Church, who either did not know the true significance of the two characters of the Saviour, or chose to conceal them.

The birthplace of Horus—the Egyptian messiah—at the Vernal Equinox was figured in Apt, or apta, meaning the corner in Egyptian. But apta is also the name of the crib and the manger; hence the child born in Apta, was said to be born in a manger; and this Apta as crib or manger is the Zodiacal sign of Cancer, as I discuss in my investigation of the Nativity. The birthplace was also indicated by the Star in the East which the Wise Men followed. When the birthplace was in the Zodiacal sign of Taurus the Bull, Sirius was the star that rose in the East to tell where the young sun-god was reborn. For this reason the Egyptians called it the 'Star of Horus.'

During the course of the precession of the equinoxes the vernal birthplace passed into the sign of Pisces, and the Messiah who had been represented for over 2,000 years by the Ram or Lamb of Aries, and previously by the Bull of Taurus, was now imaged as the Fish, or the 'Fish-man,' called Ichthys in Greek. The original Fish-man—known as An in Egypt and Oan in Chaldea—may well date from the previous cycle of precession, or 26,000 years earlier, showing just how old the doctrine of the Messiah is.

We have now seen that the Christian religion was not founded on a man, but on a divinity; that is, a Divine prototype. Far from being derived from the ideal of humanity, the Church's Christ was made up from the features of many different gods and underpinned by the mythology of Horus, the Egyptian Messiah. No one who honestly examines the evidence can come to any other conclusion than that the Church's doctrine of atonement and redemption is founded on its misinterpretation of the Egyptian mythos and that its prophecy of a 'second coming' can only be explained astronomically, never fulfilled historically.

The mythical messiah was Horus in the Osirian mythos; Khonsu in that of Amen-Ra; and Iu-em-Hetep in the cult of Ptah; and all mean the same and represent the same ever-coming Saviour. Ever-coming, because, as we have seen, there is no end to the appearance of the human representatives of the Christ principle on earth.

As we saw earlier, Iu-em-Hetep means he who comes in or with peace. This is the character in which Jesus is announced by the angels. When Jesus comes to his disciples after the resurrection it is as the bringer of peace. Yet he also tells his disciples: "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword" (Matthew 10:34). The same message was proclaimed thousands of years earlier in Egypt by Iu-em-Hetep who says: "I am the living image of Atum, proceeding from him as a sword."

Both characters belong to the mythical messiah in the Egyptian mythos, who also calls himself the "Great Disturber." The Christ of the canonical gospels has several prototypes. Sometimes the copy is derived from one original, and sometimes from another. The character of the Christ depicted by Luke is very different from that found in the Gospel of John. In Luke he is the Great Exorciser, casting out demons. John does not mention possession or obsession at all. What are we to make of this?

The answer lies in the different characters of the Egyptian Messiah. The Great Healer in the Gospel of Luke may be found in the god Khonsu, the Divine Healer, the supreme one amongst all the other healers and saviours, especially as the expeller of possessing spirits. In the Egyptian papyri he is called the "Great God, the driver away of possession."

In ancient Egypt the year began soon after the summer solstice, when the sun descended from its midsummer height and lost its force. This natural phenomena was reproduced in the Egyptian mythos by the death of Osiris; the suffering, wounded Messiah, who descended into hell and rose again as the sun of the resurrection at the Vernal Equinox as I discuss in my investigation of the Esoteric meaning of Easter.

Osiris furnished the dual type for the Mythical Christ which was later made historical in the gospels. The two characters of Horus as the tender child of 12 years and the all-powerful adult of 30 years who comes to wage war against the forces of evil are faithfully reproduced in the Gospel of Luke. The apostle describes the Christ-child's baptism and anointing at the hands of John the Baptist and the descent of the Holy Spirit, adding "And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age" (Luke 3:23).

Like the Horus the Child, Osiris also comes down to earth; enters material life and becomes mortal. He is born like the Logos, or 'as a Word.' His father is Geb, the Egyptian God of the Earth, whose consort is the Goddess Nut, one of whose names was Meri, the beloved Lady of Heaven, and these two are the prototypes of Joseph and Mary in the gospels. Osiris suffers vicariously as the saviour, redeemer, and justifier of men at the hands of Set as Jesus suffered at the hands of Herod.

In the Egyptian original of the Biblical copy there is constant conflict between Osiris and Set—the Egyptian Satan. At the Autumn Equinox, the devil of darkness began to dominate; this was the Egyptian Judas, who betrayed Osiris to his death at the last supper as I discussed in a previous article. On the day of the Great Battle which took place at the Vernal Equinox, Osiris conquered as the ascending god, the Lord of the growing light. Both these struggles are portrayed in the gospels. In the one Jesus is betrayed to his death by Judas; in the other he overcomes the temptations of Satan.

So I could continue, citing many more proofs that the historical figure of Jesus is simply a deified personification of the glorified type of the Mythical Christ as Blavatsky explains in the passage quoted earlier.

We have now seen that the Church's doctrine of an historical Jesus is founded upon the Mysteries of Osiris in which Horus was the ever-coming Son and Messiah, the solar hero, the greatest hero that ever lived in the mind of man—but note this well—not in the flesh. With few exceptions, the miracles attributed to Jesus were never literal, because he was never human. From the descent of the Holy Ghost that overshadowed Mary, to the ascension of the risen Christ, the subject-matter, the characters, occurrences, events, acts, and sayings recorded in the gospels bear the unmistakable impress of the Ancient Mystery Teachings, not the stamp of human history as we have seen in my analysis of the gospel parables.

Whether you choose to accept my thesis or not does not matter in the least. As I said in my introduction it is not my purpose to convince anyone, nor deprive devout Christians of the comfort of their religion. Yet I hope that my thinking readers will have gained a deeper understanding of the Christian religion and the truths—buried and distorted as they may be—within it which signpost the way to ancient Egypt and its Sacred Mysteries.

I hope that I have also shown that it is not necessary to throw the baby out with the bath water; or in this case the Christ-child with the dogmas the Church has engrafted upon the sacred mystery of the Mythical Christ. One can believe with all one's heart and mind in the divinity of Christ—as I do—without subscribing to the irresponsible fairy-tales the Church has erected around Him.

At the end of this sidebar you will find a list of the further contributions I have made to this website as well as some suggestions for further reading about the subjects discussed in my investigation and this afterword. It only remains for me to reiterate my deepest thanks to Gerald Massey without whose Herculean labours in Biblical scholarship I would never have found the True Christ and this article could not have been written.

 