The Last Supper unveiled by John Temple

I am indebted to John Temple for this afterword to my Easter story. He has kindly agreed to write something about the origin and significance of the Last Supper and shed a clarifying light on the character of the twelve disciples of Jesus who, it appears, were just as argumentative, selfish and foolish as the characters in my silly story!
There are no less than one hundred references to the Eucharist (Last Supper) to be found in the Bible. Of these some 20 form the basis of the dogma of transubstantiation which has been adopted by the Church. The Last Supper appears in all four canonical gospels: Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, but the earliest account occurs in the First Epistle to the Corinthians which may have been written by Clement rather than Paul. It is worth quoting in full.

"When ye come together therefore into one place, this is to eat the Lord's supper. For in eating every one taketh before other his own supper: and one is hungry, and another is drunken. What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread" (1 Corinthians 11:20-23).

This is the basis of Gabrielle Annunziato's satirical tale in which we find the disciples bickering with one another in Pizza Hut which, as we shall see later, is not unrepresentative of their characters! It is clear from these verses that Jesus draws a clear distinction between a secular 'supper' and a sacred repast. The former consisting of mere eating and drinking and the latter the reception of spiritual food in the form of bread (teachings) and wine (wisdom) which correspond symbolically—not literally—to the spiritual body and blood of the Saviour.

I shall return to this important distinction later. Meanwhile, let us see what else Paul has to say. "And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me" (1 Corinthians 11:24-25).

The 'new testament' is of course the secret wisdom which Jesus imparts to his chosen disciples that they might remember it after his death and continue the good work he began. Whether they succeeded in this task after their Master's death is another question. For Jesus—like all great Teachers—was well aware that his message would be distorted by his followers in later times, as verses 27-30 make clear.

"Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep."

Could the hidden meaning of these verses be any clearer? How much of Jesus' teaching remains in the Church today? Millions 'sleep' and are 'sickly' for want of the Heavenly food and drink which no priest is able to give them, for very few within the various churches possess the real spiritual knowledge and wisdom of the Master they purport to follow.

The two chief authorities cited by early Western medieval writers upon the Eucharist were Ambrose and Augustine. Ambrose—full name Aurelius Ambrosius (340-397 A.D.)—was a Roman Christian who rose to become Bishop of Milan and was especially zealous in the persecution of Paganism during the 4th century. His teaching was appealed to by those who believed literally in the miraculous conversion of the elements of bread and wine into the physical body and blood of Christ.

Augustine of Hippo (354-430 A.D.), on the other hand, took a different view. His teaching formed the starting-point of those who distinguished sharply between the sign and the thing signified, and who tended to regard the Eucharist as evidential of a spiritual presence of power and efficacy, not a material one. Thus Ambrose favoured a literal interpretation and Augustine a figurative or symbolical one. Generally, however, an attempt was made by both factions within the early Church to harmonise the teachings of these two Fathers and interpret them in accordance with their own standpoint.

Popular thought, then as now, tending to view everything in the concrete sense, favoured Ambrose's position that the bread and wine were the literal body and blood of Christ; whereas the more vague but spiritual language of Augustine resisted all attempts at materialisation—and rightly so in my view—for there is a spiritual presence during such holy rites, and never a material one.

It was not until the 9th century that the dogma of transubstantiation first became the subject of formal discussion. Neither Cyprian nor Tertullian was an exponent of a materialistic conception of the Lord's Supper, while Augustine held that its benefits were available only for the elect—meaning initiates. I agree entirely with Augustine in this respect, for the Eucharist was a sacred rite within the Greek Mysteries and among the ancient Egyptians long before the Christian Church existed, as we shall see in a moment.

Transubstantiation was a controversial doctrine for many centuries before officially becoming an article of faith. It was not until 831 A.D., that Paschasius Radbertus, a Benedictine monk, published a treatise On the Body and Blood of the Lord that the doctrine gained ascendancy within the Church. It is noteworthy that this pious monk tells us that the change is an inward one, and is not apparent to sight or taste, adding that if the elements retain their outward appearance, the object is to call forth faith and to remind believers that the gift is spiritual and not material. In this he echoed the views of Augustine and others.

Even then, for almost another four hundred years, the odium theologicum raged among clergy and people alike until at the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 A.D., transubstantiation was officially defined and canonized as a dogma. It was finally and firmly established by the Council of Trent in 1551, which stated: "by the consecration of the bread and wine there takes place a change of the whole substance of the bread into the substance of the body of Christ our Lord and of the whole substance of the wine into the substance of his blood."

As I said earlier, the Last Supper was simply a continuation—a Christian makeover if you like—of the sacred rites of the so-called 'Pagans'. These often partook of the character of funeral feasts and Eucharistic rites in honour of the departed. In the ancient Egyptian original of the Catholic copy of the Eucharist, Osiris takes the place of Christ, as I discussed in my article on the Esoteric meaning of Easter, to which I refer those readers who wish to explore the origins of the Eucharist further.

I said earlier that there is a spiritual presence during the celebration of the Eucharist, when it is conducted by a priest with real spiritual power and purity. There can be no question about this as those of my readers who have attended Mass under ideal circumstances will know from personal experience. Then the Eucharist becomes a magical rite in the highest and best sense of the term; real spiritual power flows down from on High, and enters into those members of the congregation who are able and willing to receive it.

Then we truly share with Christ his inheritance of Heaven by blending our inner Higher Selves with that of Christ Himself; thus becoming one with Him in every way. This is what can and does happens when this ceremony is performed in the right, devout spirit and in full understanding by a priest who knows how to blend his mind with the true Spirit of Christ. I have known such men, rare as they are, whose Divine ecstasy being communicated to their congregation, are filled with the Great Light not only during the ceremony, but at all times too.

Such a church becomes a centre of Light in the highest sense of the word, and its radiance will spread far and wide and bless the land for miles around, especially those who can blend their Inner Selves with the Radiance invoked by that holy man. And this, to a large extent, reconciles me to the many shortcomings within the various Christian churches and sects.

But what of the twelve disciples, Gabrielle Annunziato has described for us in her amusing story? Were they really so awful? No one today can say for certain, though we may wisely conjecture, based on the accounts of them we have in the gospels, and so gain some idea of their characters. This subject has rarely been dealt with better than by Peter Marshall (1902-1949), a Chaplain who served in the U.S. Senate for many years and who described the muddy, outer surface of the twelve Apostles before they were chosen and accepted as Disciples by their Lord.

He describes Simon, nearly bald, with grey fringes of hair. His hands are rough and horny. He smells of fish. He is uncouth, blustering, clumsy, and impulsive. When provoked he is liable to burst forth into lurid profanity. He is very stubborn and set in his ways. His ideas will be hard to change. The next two are brothers; they are successful and therefore unpopular with the other fishermen. They are boastful, and through cupped hands they like to shout taunts at the other fishermen as they haul up their empty or nearly empty nets. They are ambitious and unscrupulous. If you want anything in life—grab it, is their motto. These were James and John.

The next is also a fisherman. He is cautious, lacking in faith and will be like a break on the progress of the other disciples. Thomas is his name. "This is not the time, let us wait and see" is his motto. Then we have Levi, or Matthew, a tax collector, who is hated by all and sundry. He has been counting money all his life and has a mind like a calculator as we learnt in Gabrielle Annunziato's story.

And what about Andrew? He has no personality, though he is known to be the brother of Simon, who became Peter, the first Disciple mentioned above. Why should he have been chosen? Then we still have Bartholomew, Thaddeus, Philip, and another James, and a man from Canaan, called Simon.

There we have the twelve disciples, all except one—Judas, who has not yet appeared on the scene. Would you have chosen any of them to preach the Gospel of Peace and Goodwill to all Men, as Jesus did? Yet he chose them. And these men have probably had more influence on human history than any other twelve one could select, if we leave out Paul.

They were jealous of one another, as one can read in the various parts of the New Testament if one has sufficient knowledge of how such occult fraternities behave. They were cowards, who betrayed their Master and deserted him in the great Hour of his Agony. They believed in nothing but their own interests and did not know the meaning of brotherly love. They knew not Peace until after the Master was tortured and slain in the cruellest manner possible.

Yet, in the end they achieved Faith, and Courage; and their self-interest was replaced by love for their brothers if all we read in the gospels is true. Today there is as little faith as there was in the days of Christ. There is the same amount of fear, of self-interest, of unbelief, of cruelty, jealousy, indifference and spite, as there ever was in the woeful history of mankind.

There is no Peace on Earth. Many people have asked me over the years "what if Christ returned today?" You know the answer as well as I do. He would be betrayed, condemned, deserted, and killed in some way or another all over again. There is no Peace, no Faith among the masses. Only distrust and cowardice, ruthlessness and injustice over the greater part of the globe. No Peace! Except for the very few, who are the true Disciples of the Master, the true Apostles, the mere handful when compared with the many millions whose mind is attuned to war and revenge only. It is for them I have written this afterword; may they profit from it!