The Path
In this afterword we will examine a short passage taken from the unpublished writings of H. P. Blavatsky, to discover the hidden truths it contains.
"There is a road, steep and thorny, beset with perils of every kind, but yet a road, and it leads to the very heart of the Universe. I can tell you how to find those who will show you the secret gateway that opens inward only, and closes fast behind the neophyte for evermore. There is no danger that dauntless courage cannot conquer; there is no trial that spotless purity cannot pass through; there is no difficulty that strong intellect cannot surmount. For those who win onwards there is reward past all telling—the power to bless and save humanity; for those who fail, there are other lives in which success may come."

We shall endeavour to show that there are several occult truths concealed in this remarkable passage which, so far as we are aware, have never been identified or explained before. Let us begin with the first line which, on the face of it, seems self-explanatory: "There is a road, steep and thorny, beset with perils of every kind, but yet a road, and it leads to the very heart of the Universe." It is the very simplicity of these few, carefully chosen words that belie the hidden sense behind them.

The road is 'steep'; therefore it leads to the heights, it is a Spiritual Path, not a material one. This is obvious, you may say, but you'd be surprised how many so-called 'occultists' consider the left-hand-path or 'LHP' as it is more commonly known, to be an equally valid road to liberation and enlightenment as we discuss in our Occult Faq. The LHP, as its practitioners will tell you, is concerned with serving self, not others. Moreover, it is an easy path as the Bible tells us, "for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat" (Matthew 7:13).

Blavatsky wisely left the 'perils' on Right-hand path unspecified. Had she spelled out even a tenth of them she would have quickly lost the few loyal pupils she had, for even the most promising of them would have taken to their heels in sheer terror. You may think we exaggerate, but if you are far advanced upon the path to the Light you will know we write the truth, and if you are not, we commend the words attributed to Jesus, in the Gospel of Mark: "Ye know not what ye ask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptised with the baptism that I am baptised with?" (Mark 10:38).

Perhaps the most enigmatical of the statements in this first sentence is the reference to the 'very heart of the Universe'. Unless the reader has thoroughly studied Isis Unveiled and The Secret Doctrine this may mean anything or nothing to them. Let us say that the 'heart' is Love and that Love is God and leave it at that. To say more would be to prejudice the reader in favour of our own ideas which, although they may well be correct, are no substitute for one's own intuition. So let us move on to the next line.

"I can tell you how to find those who will show you the secret gateway that opens inward only, and closes fast behind the neophyte for evermore." This has several meanings. Only the most literally-minded would think the 'secret gateway' is an actual physical portal, or worse, the so-called 'third eye' which some lunatics attempt to 'open' by drilling holes in their heads! Some readers might suggest the gateway that 'opens inward only' must be Inner Peace, and we would not disagree with them. Might it be one of the once secret Chakras, now hijacked by all and sundry for their own questionable purposes? Perhaps.

Blavatsky does not say. She simply calls it 'the secret gateway'. Is this the strait gate and narrow way Jesus refers to in the Gospel narratives attributed to him? Yes. Does it perhaps also refer to the flames which guard the spiritual paradise called the 'World of Astral Fire' in The Golden Star? Yes again. You see, it is the same with this statement by Blavatsky as with every other genuine occult teaching. It can be interpreted in many ways, each of which is correct but not necessarily complete. We cannot emphasise this important point often enough.

Before leaving this sentence we would draw the reader's attention to the words 'closes fast behind the neophyte for evermore'. This too, has several meanings. It refers to the fact that once our feet are firmly on the Path there is no going back. We can try to return to our old ways, but as the Neophyte Glyndon in Bulwer Lytton's occult novel Zanoni discovers, there is no peace, no hiding place for those who have once tasted the mysterious 'elixir'. Another meaning is that occultism is, in the main, a solitary pursuit, for no one can do our questing for us. 'Evermore' is significant too, for the terminus of the Path is so far away that to the sore-footed pilgrim it seems like an Eternity. With that sobering thought we must leave the second line and pass on to the third.

"There is no danger that dauntless courage cannot conquer; there is no trial that spotless purity cannot pass through; there is no difficulty that strong intellect cannot surmount." At first glance this appears to be telling us the same thing in three different ways; that the Path is hard, very hard. Let us look a little closer. And let us use one of the keys we have given you time and time again in our articles—the key of lower self or body, Higher Self and Divine Soul; the three main parts that make up man on earth. No lower self is ever brave. Foolhardy often, rash and reckless certainly, but never courageous. Courage is a quality of the Higher Self which girds up the sinews of the body and makes the lower self capable of acts of heroism which astonish us.

Likewise, no lower self is naturally pure. How can it be? It is of the earth, earthy, born from the mud of matter. You might object that many animals bathe regularly (unlike many humans!). Elephants are especially fond of water and hate to be dirty. This is true of many birds too and we've all seen a cat meticulously washing its paws. So why do we say that the lower self is not naturally—that is by or through Nature—pure? It is an animal no less than an elephant or a cat. True, but neither of these admirable creatures possesses a Higher Self, only a lower self with its intelligence and inherited instinct. It is this latter quality that compels an elephant to bathe and a cat to lick its paws.

Now, it is true that man has instincts too—which differ but little from those of animals—so he ought to behave the same. He often does, but not always. Why is that? Because he has a Higher Self. But, you will object again, isn't the Higher Self good? How can it be the cause of impurity in us? It can't, but the combination of the two selves can. Let us use an analogy to explain this seeming paradox by comparing the intellectual abilities of the lower self to that of a naughty, lazy and thoroughly selfish six-year-old.

Now—let us introduce our six-year-old to a worldly-wise and altogether much cleverer 13-year-old. Let us suppose the teenager is led by the child into all sorts of mischief, lending it his or her superior knowledge and intellect in the commission of crimes which would turn any responsible parent's hair grey. Now, do you not agree that our delinquent six-year-old is made much worse by the addition of the extra intellectual capabilities of the teenager? In the process of 'supercharging' the child's mental capacity, their good instincts, which in an animal, would guide its actions, have been largely if not completely overcome.

In other words the presence of a Higher Self in man seems to make him behave worse than an animal would or does. The saying 'as bad as an animal' should really be dropped in favour of 'as worse as a man', for no animal is capable of the infinite cruelty and wickedness of mankind at its worst. This is especially evident in the most primitive types of humanity, and we don't mean savage native tribes but the far more 'primitive' drunken, violent savages that infest our town centres on a weekend!

So now you know the simple—but not obvious—reason the lower self is not naturally pure. It can become so—externally and inwardly—only if the Higher Self takes a hand in its development as you can read in Erika Hahn's enigmatical tale The Shadow that turned. Now you also know the reason why men and women behave as they do, and why even the best of them can exhibit uncharacteristic cruelty and coldness which astonishes those who know them. This is why the lower self needs the 'strong intellect' Blavatsky mentions, for without it, it is incapable of responding to the wise guidance of its better half.

So, to recap, courage is a quality of the Higher Self that conquers all obstacles on the Path. Purity, both moral and physical, is instilled in the lower self by the Higher. But the quality itself comes from the Divine Soul, for that alone is truly pure, having never mixed with matter, dwelling in pure Spirit. It is this purity of mind and body which allows the neophyte to pass through all the trials and tests life throws at us. Intellect, on the other hand, as we saw in our discussion of intelligence in our occult studies course, is a quality of the evolved lower self; a natural development of animal intelligence and instinct.

So in this third line of Blavatsky's discourse on the Path we find the three principles of man perfectly described, albeit in a concealed manner. Which brings us to the fourth and final line. "For those who win onwards there is reward past all telling—the power to bless and save humanity; for those who fail, there are other lives in which success may come." This is largely self-explanatory. For it is those who are far advanced upon the Path who can raise up their fellowmen and women to a realisation of their heritage as sons and daughters of God.

The words 'for those who fail...' remind us of the moving parable of the Prodigal Son. Has not every seeker failed in the past? Are not many of us failing now and will we not fail again in the future, over and over again, until all our lessons are well and truly learnt? Bitter lessons! "Earned in thoughtless play of long-lost ages; learned with scalding tears, that flood despairing eyes in agony, and deep regret," as we may read in The Golden Star. Blavatsky knew this better than most and was filled with forgiveness, understanding and compassion for the weakness of mankind because of that knowledge.

But there is a further aspect to this passage, the key to which is to be found in another of Blavatsky's writings, The Voice of the Silence. In it we may read that: "Thou canst not travel on the Path before thou hast become that Path itself." Few will realise how great a Truth is contained in these words. A truth which even fewer can understand, especially those who wildly twitter, flicker and flutter, squirming in their turbulent desire to walk the Path and reach freedom, power, and the fulfilment of every wish their wandering minds can conceive. But the whirlpools of life hold them fast, and in the end they are hurled back again to the place from whence they thought the Path began, and they are bewildered and confused and seek in vain for someone or something to blame for their failure.

Those who are still held in thrall by material goods are not of the Path, for they are as material in every way as the Path is Spiritual. These prisoners will find a thousand excuses for not doing what they ought to do with courage and determination, for they are weak and miserable and lack that Faith which marks the one who is on the Path and is the Path himself or herself. We discussed many of these excuses in previous articles (see the further reading list at the end of this afterword), so we shall not repeat ourselves, except to say that the one thing the lower self knows how to do really well, is make excuses for its own ineptitude!

By saying the seeker must become the Path Blavatsky is telling us that every part of us must be dedicated to the work of liberation and enlightenment. The opposite approach is that adopted by those who attend church religiously every Sunday but hearken to the sermons of the devil the rest of the week!

In other words, body, lower self and Higher Self must all work together with a will if we are to become the Path and reach our journey's end. But we must be careful here not to fall into the trap of either fanaticism or asceticism. The man or woman who is so 'good and pure' that all the worlds above them shudder with dismay is far from the Path. So are the tight-lipped, hard-eyed bigots, ever spreading scandal and casting aspersions upon the really good, who are forever beyond the understanding of such pious, mealy-mouthed hypocrites.

The ascetic who despises their own body and goes to the most extraordinary lengths to 'subdue' it by indulging in all sorts of weird and wonderful 'religious' practises in the hope of achieving 'enlightenment' is not on the Path either. Between such extremes we find every possible combination of 'swings' to the material and spiritual and back again. The panacea for all extremes is Peace Within; may that blessing be yours, dear reader!