The teachings of Gautama Buddha
In our final commentary in this investigation of Tibetan Buddhism we aim to summarise the principal teachings of the Buddha and the reasons why they contain both truth and untruth. If you have not read our previous two commentaries in which we recount the story of his birth, life and enlightenment, we suggest you do so before continuing, or you will not reap the full benefits of this series of articles.

There is a very important difference between orthodox Buddhism in all its forms which owe their origin to the public teachings of the Buddha, and his esoteric lore. The Buddha was a born Hindu and disciple of the 'twice born' (the initiated Brahmans). His teachings, therefore, could not be different from their doctrines. He gave to the world only their outward material body and kept its spirit for his Elect. Unless this fact is realised, the many sects and interpretations which constitute modern Buddhism will remain inexplicable.

Whether the Buddha was right to disclose the secret teachings of the Brahmans to the masses is a matter you must decide by yourself. We must remember that no one was ever taken on as a pupil by the Brahman Initiates unless he made a vow not to disclose the inner Teachings to the outer world. Whether the inner Teachings of the Brahmans were correct has nothing to do with the fact that the Buddha gave them away, with the results that few know what he was really trying to teach, as is shown by the fact that there are and have been so many different interpretations of his words. According to some scholars, the sacred canon of Southern Buddhism alone is said to be six times longer than the Bible. What the complete texts of Buddhism amount to has never been accurately calculated, but it is thought to have originally comprised more than 80,000 separate books, most of them now lost, so that today less than 6,000 remain accessible to scholars.

So much for background, what of the Buddha himself? As we learnt in the afterword to the previous parts of this investigation, he studied with many teachers, and starved himself almost to death in his endeavours to find the One Light. But even the finding of that Light, which we hinted at in our afterword to part two, should not have been revealed by him or by anyone else, for how can an untrained person ever understand such things? Such stories lead to much misery, and to mistaken zeal on the part of unbalanced seekers, who go to all sorts of lengths in order to emulate the Buddha, as they think, and to become world Teachers in turn, which again is impossible, for the real world teacher appeared some 5,000 years ago and will not return to Earth for another 427,000 years as you may read in the Gospel of Chrishna-Jeseus published on this website. So those who hanker after such a World Teacher are doomed to disappointment in this respect too.

The adaptability of Buddhism is often cited as its greatest virtue, but is it? Any Teaching which has to be 'adapted' to accommodate itself to differing peoples and cultures cannot be complete in itself. A Teaching either is, or is not true, or complete, this must be obvious to all thinking seekers. Thus the Scriptures of Buddhism vary with each country, and to mention a few instances, there is the so-called Buddhism proper, that of Burma, and especially of Ceylon; Lamaism, which is the Buddhism of Tibet; Foism, from Fo, the Chinese form of the Buddha; and the Buddhism of Japan, which is a mixture of what is called 'true' Buddhism and of the native Shintoism.

Each of these four principal divisions has its own Bible. The Bible or canon of Southern Buddhism, i.e., of Burma and Ceylon, was written in Pali (a dialect of Sanskrit, which some think was the Buddha's mother-tongue), and this is the oldest of the Buddhist scriptures. The Pali Bible is called Tipitaka (in Sanskrit Tripitaka), meaning the three baskets. The Pali canon, which forms part of the other and larger canons, is about the same size as the Christian Bible; but if the various numerous repetitions are included, it is about three times its size. The 'Three Baskets' are the following: the Vinaya-Pitaka, or basket of discipline, containing rules for moral conduct and religious usage; the Sutta-pitaka, or Basket of Doctrine, which in five treatises called Nikayas, deals with questions of doctrine, the Triratna, or so-called Buddhist Trinity, the Buddha, the Doctrine, and the Samga, or Church; the Abhidhamma-Pitaka, or Basket of Metaphysics, which treats of ethical and philosophical questions.

The Bible of Lamaism, in Tibet, is probably at least 50 or 60 times as large as the Christian canon, and there are innumerable commentaries on it. The Canon of Foism gives a large place to magic and superstitions, the Bible of Japanese Buddhism preaches a religion which is almost as much Shintoism as Buddhism.

From this it will be clear to you that to deal with all of these different schools, sects and interpretations in depth would take several centuries. As we do not expect (or wish) to last that long, the best we can do is to review a few of the earliest doctrines of Buddhism, selecting the most useful and popular ones. One of these tells us: "By oneself evil is done; by oneself one suffers. By oneself evil is left undone; by oneself one is purified. Purity and impurity belong to oneself. No one can purify another." This has all the hallmarks of a genuine teaching of the Buddha and is echoed by all the great spiritual Teachers.

Buddhist philosophy
Buddhist philosophy is the impersonal pantheism of the Upanishads, and to the same source it owes its doctrine of reincarnation. Then we have the doctrine of Nirvana, which we briefly discussed in part two of this investigation. Let us say at once that there is no such thing as a Nirvana on earth. And if anyone should claim that he has found it, then he is a person who neglects his material duties, for if he moved amongst his fellow men and attended to his worldly tasks as he should, then there is no Nirvana for him, but much pain and disappointment, which, however, should not deter him from doing his work and completing it, so that he might become worthy, perhaps, of a reward elsewhere.

The other kind of Nirvana envisaged by Buddhists is said to be a merging in 'God' implying the loss of all personality. This is contrary to all occult Laws, and the foolish dream of weaklings, without wit or self-respect. Who wants to become merged, and so lost, in God? The first Law of occult science is the Law of Evolution, as we discuss in our occult studies course article of the same name. What greater loss can there be than the obliteration of one's individuality or personality? Impossible, dear reader, a mere pipe dream of the oriental sluggard, who sits by the wayside begging for alms, being too lazy to work. This idea of Nirvana, on earth or in Heaven, as seen with Buddhist eyes and understood by Buddhist minds must be cast overboard at once, for it is completely wrong.

The Four Noble Truths
One of the best points in Buddhist philosophy is the great stress it lays upon the correctness of life; i.e., the moral as distinct from the ritual element in religion. In the Four Noble Truths which formed part of the Buddha's first sermon, we have the genuine Buddhist doctrine in a nutshell. These truths are as follows: That suffering is universal, no man being free from it from birth to death. That the cause of this suffering is desire or longing, which leads to rebirth and the continuance of desire and misery. That delivery from suffering is to be obtained through the suppression of desire, the absence of passion of every kind; through that quiet mental state which is satisfied and has no thirst for what it has not. That this result is to be obtained by pursuing the Noble Eightfold Path, namely, right belief, right aspiration, right speech, right conduct, right means of subsistence, right aim and effort, right memory and right meditation.

This is all very well and sounds well, but is it without error? We should say that the teaching of the Four Noble Truths contains both truth and error. Let us explain why. Without desire we get nowhere, though with too much of it we get nowhere either. Suppression of desire leads to inactivity, which, taken to its logical conclusion, may ultimately result in neglecting all one's worldly duties and responsibilities, which leads to reincarnation. So long as we have not fulfilled our appointed task we must return again and again to earth until we have done that which we must do, learn that which we must learn, which is different for all of us.

The absence of passion of every kind is impossible for a sane and healthy person of either sex. Let us give one example only; what man or woman without 'passion' in its best sense can ever achieve anything in the arts and sciences? Can you imagine a great poet, a great painter, actor, artist, writer or scientist doing his work for the enlightenment of man if he is as cold as a lump of crystal and without good red blood in his body? No, such icy beings do not belong to heaven but to hell, from which they sprang.

You may object that by 'passion' the Buddha referred to sexual desire. Maybe he did; but again, a person who is not attracted by the beauty of the opposite sex, is not a man or a woman but a lump of worthless clay. You will remember in this connection that we have stressed over and over again in our articles the need to control our passions and desires, not their complete suppression. The Buddha was supposed to have been a vehicle of Wisdom, and we believe he was indeed, and if what we believe is true, then he could never have made such a rule as the total suppression of 'passion' for that is impossible without evil results in the end.

A mind which has no desire for that which it has not, is the mind of a moron, for God has placed within our minds the desire for beauty and perfection which, on earth, is a faint shadow of that Beauty and Perfection we can find in the Heaven which we all desire, if we are good and sensible people. 'Lead us from Light to greater Light, from Beauty to finer Beauty, from Perfection to Bliss'. Is this a desire or isn't it? Are you not reading this because you have the desire for knowledge and truth? Must you therefore be miserable and dwell in poverty on earth? What rubbish! We do not believe that the Buddha meant or taught this at all, but that his words, whatever they were, were twisted by his so-called 'followers', who, as usual, tried to improve upon the Teachings of the Master, without having his Light and Wisdom.

The Noble Eightfold Path
As to the Eightfold Path, there are good things in it and things not so good. Let us consider them in the sequence the Buddha taught them. Firstly: right belief or comprehension. Do you see the snag in this? Who knows without true Teachings or a true teacher what right belief really is? Secondly, right aspiration. This is all very well, but aspiration for what, and to what end? Thirdly, right speech. This is easier to understand, for we all know, or at least we hope so, what is right speech, and what is not. As we see it, it is the absence in speech of injury to man, woman and child, and even to the animals. Fourthly, right conduct, and here again, let us remind you that a gentleman is a man who is gentle in all he does, says or thinks, filled with compassion and understanding; such a one practices right conduct at all times; and when the time for speech is not present, then he remains silent.

Fifthly, right means of subsistence varies with every person, for the subsistence of the man who works in a sewer, no matter how good a man he is, and if the work suits him, is not the right kind of subsistence for a man of finer sensibilities, who would collapse under the great strain imposed by this most useful work. Sixthly, right aim and effort also varies with all, and no rules can be laid down to meet every case. Seventhly, right memory is a gift of the Gods and no one can force it in any way, though it is right to try to improve our memory for good things and ignore the bad if we can, whilst right meditation is something one has to learn under the guidance of a good and kind Master, who will tell his Pupil what right meditation is, though we have given you several hints and tips about this in the penultimate article in our occult studies course.

So in the foregoing you have the good and bad points of the rules of the Eightfold Path, which is not a path upon which one can travel without a good and wise Guide if we wish to avoid the danger of becoming lost.

Enlightenment
We have now seen that the ethical standard of the Buddha's teachings was a very lofty one. But we have also seen that it contained many failings. It has been said that Buddhism assumes the absolute equality of all men, which is an utter impossibility for not all men have the same advanced standard of spiritual evolution, some being very old in this respect, others medium, and the majority young in earthly as well as spiritual experience. In short, some men are very advanced in knowledge, understanding, experience and wisdom, whilst others have little or none of it. Where then, is that 'equality' of which we are told the Lord Buddha spoke so eloquently? Did he really teach this?

Even if he did, with all his wisdom and goodness of heart and mind and soul, he made the greatest possible mistake a Teacher can make, for the reasons just stated. We therefore believe that he did not teach this impossible equality at all, but that his successors turned round his words in an unintelligent manner, as is usual with such successors. We find this in every form of religion, philosophy and spiritual teaching. The Founder knows what he is saying, having all wisdom, inspired from on high, for within his inner Self there glows a great Light, a Light which contains as well as attracts true Wisdom. He is a torch-bearer, with the torch ablaze in his hands. But when he returns whence he came, lo! the torch is extinguished again, and darkness reigns instead of that divine Light. There may be an afterglow; but that is not the Light. Only the true Messenger has this Light; the rest have a glimmer of it.

Despite this fundamental fact, countless millions put their faith in the efficacy of the catalogue of 'magical' aids we have mentioned in this investigation in the misguided belief that they will confer enlightenment and develop clairvoyance and other supernormal abilities in them. Some followers of Tibetan Buddhism even go so far as to claim that such rituals and aids form the core of the Buddha's 'secret' teachings to his disciples. Nothing could be further from the truth, as we have seen. External rituals cannot substitute for internal striving, for liberation and enlightenment come from within not without.

Some of the Buddha's Teachings are the same as those we find in the Bible, and in other religious books. And how could it be otherwise? For the great Truths never change or they would not be Truths. What changes is man's perception of these Truths, generally for the worse, as we have seen in our discussion of the distortion of the pure teachings of the Buddha by those who wished to 'improve' them or make them more accessible to the masses. Hence the constant need for new Messengers to re-state the great Truths in all their pristine purity, at the same time cleansing them of the barnacles of bigotry and weeds of superstition lesser men have engrafted upon them in their blindness and vanity.

Examples of this are to be found in the countless antiquities of Buddhism scattered all over the world, just as they are in the Christian religion. Relics of the Buddha abound everywhere, all claimed to be the true and original ones, connected with the Lord himself. The legendary details of these relics is so overwhelming that to attempt to list them all would turn this afterword into a catalogue of these 'holy' remains. There are for instance the eight sacred hairs at Rangoon and the alms bowl at Kandahar. The canine tooth, 'dalada', conveyed to Ceylon, no doubt with much religious pomp and circumstance in A.D.310, and destroyed at Goa in 1560. It is now represented by an ivory substitute at Kandy.

We said just now that the great Truths never change. So let us conclude our brief review of the Buddha's teachings with a few examples of the truths he taught.

"Who is the good man? The religious man is good. And who is religious? He who agrees with truth.

"Who is the strong man? The patient man is strong, for he has conquered self and all the petulance of self. He is calm, enduring, blameless.

"Who is the wise man? He who has obtained insight into the nature of his own being. He who keeps his mind free from the pollution of selfishness and leads a life of truth."

These are true Teachings from the mouth of a Master, unadulterated. But to know the difference between truth and falsehood and half-truths, one needs the light of that Wisdom which the Master delivers on behalf of the still greater Masters in the higher realms of Light, and this is the reason for our investigation of Tibetan Buddhism, which we hope has been as enjoyable and profitable for you to read as it was for us to write it.