Plato's Academy and its legacy
In this final afterword we conclude our brief review of the teachings of Plato and end with a look at the philosophical concept of Hylozoism
After travelling for ten or twelve years, Plato returned to Athens and founded his famous Esoteric School—known as the Academy—in 387 B.C., in the gardens of his own private estate. The Academy flourished for more than 300 years until 86 B.C., when it was disbanded and its initiates and pupils dispersed, most probably on the orders of the infamous Roman dictator Sulla. Many centuries later, in 410 AD, a pale imitation of the Academy was revived, which owed more to Neoplatonism and contemplative mysticism than Plato's esoteric teachings. It persisted until 529 AD when it was finally closed by Justinian I.

The Academy continued, with varying fortunes, to maintain its identity as a Platonic school, first at Athens, and later at Alexandria until the first century of the Christian era. It modified the Platonic system in the direction of mysticism and demonology, and underwent at least one period of scepticism. It ended in a loosely constructed eclecticism. With the advent of Neoplatonism founded by Ammonius Saccas and developed by Plotinus, Platonism definitely entered the cause of Paganism against Christianity. Nevertheless, the great majority of the Christian philosophers down to St. Augustine were Platonists. They appreciated the uplifting influence of Plato's psychology and metaphysics, and recognised in that influence a powerful ally of Christianity in the warfare against materialism and naturalism.

Students attended the School from every part of the Hellenic world which eventually became the educational centre of Greece. Plato's method of teaching is said to have combined the conversational method of Socrates, the system of discourse used by the ordinary university professor, and the mental and moral discipline of the Mystery Schools of which the Sage of Athens was an initiate.

Music was the first subject presented to his pupils, as Plato believed that the study of this art offers the best preparation for philosophy. He tells us that music had existed in Egypt for at least ten thousand years, and that it was of such an inspiring nature that only gods or godlike men could have invented it. In the Mysteries, the Lyre was regarded as the secret symbol of the human constitution; the body of the instrument representing the human body, the strings the nerves, and the musician the Higher Self. Playing upon the nerves, the Higher Self thus created the harmonies of normal functioning, which, however, became discords if the nature of man were defiled. Our regular readers will recall that we referred to this in our article on the Magic of Music.

"Musical training," he goes on to tell us, "is a more potent instrument than any other, because rhythm and harmony find their way into the inward places of the soul, on which they mightily fasten." To this he added gymnastics, insisting, however, that even physical exercise should be performed for the benefit of the soul, since the soul demands a temple worthy of its occupancy. The combination of music and gymnastics, he said, produces a harmonious balance between soul and body. Physical training develops courage and fortitude; music develops a love of the beautiful, and affords the mental and moral discipline necessary to the acquirement of philosophical knowledge. He considered music, however, as the more important of the two, warning all intelligent rulers to pay careful attention to the development of music and never allowing bad qualities to debase it, as these would affect the mental and moral outlook of the citizens who listened to it. Would that our clever modern educationalists followed his wise advice!

In his Phaedrus, Plato says: "Being initiated in those Mysteries, which it is lawful to call the most blessed...we were freed from the molestations of evils, which otherwise await us in a future period of time." Here he refers in a concealed manner to the tribulations of those who were compelled to return once more to the 'evils' of reincarnation, while the initiates had done with them and would proceed to the Heaven of the Astral Fire described in Vision 6 of The Golden Star in due time.

Plato continues: "In consequence of this divine initiation, we became spectators of entire, simple, immovable, and blessed visions, resident in a pure light." This sentence shows that the initiates saw visions, gods, spirits. As the great Neoplatonist scholar, Thomas Taylor correctly observes: "the most sublime part of initiation consisted in beholding the gods themselves invested with a resplendent light." In other words, the highest planetary spirits. The last of the Neoplatonists, Proclus, is unequivocal about this: "In all the initiations and mysteries, the gods exhibit many forms of themselves, and appear in a variety of shapes, and sometimes, indeed, a formless light of themselves is held forth to the view; sometimes this light is according to a human form, and sometimes it proceeds into a different shape."

Plato, in his Laws, treats of the social and political virtues; in his Phaedo and the seventh Book of the Republic, of the purifying virtues; and in his Theaetetus, of the contemplative and sublimer virtues. In his Phaedo we read: "While we live, we shall approach nearest to intuitive knowledge, if we hold no communion with the body, except, what absolute necessity requires, not suffer ourselves to be pervaded by its nature, but purify ourselves from it until God himself shall release us." In other words Plato advocates that wise control of the body and lower self which we have often referred to in our several articles, but he does not deny the needs of the body, as some ignorant fanatics do.

In the tenth book of the Republic Plato describes the souls (Higher Selves) of the Greek Heroes preparing for their next reincarnation. Most curious, he said, was the spectacle—sad and laughable and strange—for their choice was in most cases based on their own experience of a previous life. There he saw the soul which had once been Orpheus choosing the life of a swan out of enmity to the race of women, hating to be born of a woman because they had been his murderers. Agamemnon took the life of an eagle, because he hated human nature by reason of his sufferings. Atlanta, seeing the great fame of an athlete, was unable to resist the temptation to become one. After her came one who chose the soul of the jester, whilst Thersites put on the form of a monkey.

Lastly came the soul of Odysseus who, in recollection of his former troubles, was disenchanted with ambition, and so went about for a considerable time in search of the life of a private man who had no cares. Plato tells us he had some difficulty in finding this, which had been neglected by everybody else; and when he saw it he said that he was delighted to have it; wise man! Now, amusing as all this is, it yet has an important meaning which is that to a large extent it is the choices we have made in our previous lives which determine under what conditions we will be reincarnated and in what type of bodies. But do not mistake this for zoomorphism, as so many have and do. Evolution does not retrogress. Having once been men or women we do not become animals, though we may take on their characteristics, and this is what Plato meant, the better to conceal the truth.

He reprises this theme in Book V of his Laws, in which he says: "The greatest penalty of evil-doing is to grow into the likeness of bad men, and, growing like them, to fly from the conversation of the good, and be cut off from them, and cleave to and follow after the company of the bad." Those attracted to sorcery and witchcraft may sneer at this, but they should know that this is exactly what happens when we—at the time of judgement after death—condemn ourselves to return to earth or descend into still lower realms of greater darkness as you can read in our article on the The Weighing of the Heart— an investigation of the ancient Egyptian mystery of the Judgement of the Dead.

Although Plato is not generally regarded as a scientist, a careful analysis of his writings will reveal the germs of many "modern" discoveries. For instance, he taught that gravitation is not merely the law of the attraction of lesser bodies to greater, but a magnetic repulsion of similars and attraction of dissimilars. Although Aristotle taught that the Earth is the centre of the universe, Plato knew better than his pupil and was well aware of the difference between the heliocentric system which governed the visible Kosmos and the esoteric system which governed the invisible realms or planes of Occult Science.

Antedating Paracelsus by some 2,000 years, Plato traced all diseases back to their psychological causes. He hinted at the secret teachings concerning the earlier races upon our globe, describing the "winged" and androgynous races which "preceded the earthly human race, in which the primitive history was gradually forgotten and men sank deeper and deeper into ignorance."

Thomas Taylor, whose translations of Plato's writings have never been equalled, said of them: "Surely no one can be so ignorant as to think that a bare knowledge of the Greek tongue, such as is acquired at universities, can be sufficient qualification for translating any one of Plato's dialogues without understanding his secret doctrine? This would produce nothing but a heap of absurdities, would only abuse the credulity of the simple reader, and would himself in the end sink into silent contempt." It is precisely this 'heap of absurdities' which we alluded to in our articles on Atlantis, which has led so many to conclude that Plato's dialogues contain no 'secrets' at all. Here we must reluctantly conclude our discussion of this truly great philosopher and fulfil our promise to say something about Hylozoism—an important branch of philosophy which is undergoing something of a revival of late.

Hylozoism
Hylozoism is a very ancient philosophical concept that matter is in some sense alive which dates back at least as far as the Milesian school of pre-Socratic philosophers that began with Thales of Miletus in the 4th century B.C. whom we discussed in part one of this investigation. Actually, the concept goes back to ancient Egypt and probably Atlantis, for when esoterically understood, is the highest aspect of Pantheism. The essential premise of Hylozoism is that matter is in some senses animate if not actually conscious. Thales, Anaximenes, and Heraclitus all taught that there is a form of life in all material objects. And so there is, but only after it has been set 'alight' by the Fire of Spirit as we may read in chapter 8 of The Golden Star, as well as in The Secret Doctrine

.
The doctrine of Hylozoism was revived during the 14th to 17th centuries of our era by Paracelsus, Bernardino Telesio, Giordano Bruno and others. Bruno favoured a form of Christian pantheism which came close to the teachings of Occult Science, wherein a hierarchy of creative beings is the source, cause, medium, and end of all things, which of course is true. It was this Pantheism which got him into trouble with the Catholic Church and ultimately resulted in him being burned at the stake for various heresies. Telesio, on the other hand, began from an Aristotelian basis and, through radical empiricism, came to believe that a living force was what informed all matter. We may say that both were right, but viewed the problem from different perspectives, for Occult Science states that it is the Universal Life Principle which animates all material things and bodies, but that life must first be infused into matter, and this is done by the creators at every level of manifestation.

Hylozoism was subsequently taken up by the so-called 'Cambridge Platonists' in the 17th century, who attempted to reconcile Neoplatonist philosophy with Christian dogma and mostly failed to do justice to either. Later still, Hobbes, Spinoza, Herbert Spencer and Ernst Haeckel developed the concept further without improving on the original ideas of Thales and Heraclitus. But there is little point in dwelling upon their work, for elegant and ingenious as some of their theories and conclusions are, they do not tell us how life enters matter or where it comes from, for these are questions no philosopher has answered, or can ever answer, unless he is an initiate, and even then, he can never know the full answer, for that, as we told you in our article about the paradox of the chicken and the egg, is the secret of the Supreme Deity of our Universe.

The origin of life is a scientific problem which remains unsolved. Scientists have put forward plenty of theories, but possess precious few facts, and in this respect, are no closer to solving the mysteries of life than the Philosophers of ancient Greece. All Science can tell us is that life has not always reigned on our Earth. There was a time when even a simple globule of protoplasm had not yet appeared at the bottom of the seas. Whence came the impulse which caused the molecules of carbon, nitrogen etc., to group themselves into the first primitive organism which scientists believe all higher life-forms have evolved from? What were the prototypes of the first single-celled organisms?

Did they arrive here from other planets in the Universe? And if so, by what means were they carried from those other planets to Earth? Unless the teachings of Occult Science we discuss in our articles on the Occult Sun and Why Matter matters, are accepted, we are compelled either to accept a 'miracle' or the dogma of an anthropomorphic creator as promulgated by the Christian Church, complete with all our human vices (such as jealously and anger!), which clash as much with Philosophy and Logic, as they degrade the ideal of an Infinite Universal Deity, before whose incomprehensible, awful grandeur the highest human intellect feels dwarfed.

In this respect the modern scientist, while arbitrarily placing himself on the highest pinnacle of human intellectuality, shows himself spiritually and intuitionally far below the conceptions of even the ancient Greeks, themselves on a far lower level, in these respects, than the great Sages of ancient Egypt from which the Greeks acquired their knowledge of Matter and Spirit.

Hylozoism—from the perspective of Occult Science—demands Absolute Divine Intelligence, which would pervade the numberless active, creating Forces, or 'Creators', which Entities are moved by and have their being in, from, and through, the Divine Intelligence, the latter, nevertheless, having no more personal concern in them or their creations, than the Sun has in the sunflower and its seeds, or in vegetation in general. Such active "Creators" are known to exist and are believed in by occultists, because they are perceived and sensed by the inner Man. In other words, by the Higher Self through attunement with the Soul, which is ever linked up with these Universal Conditions, Powers and Beings. Thus the evolved occultist says that an Absolute Deity, having to be unconditioned and unrelated, cannot be thought of at the same time as an active, creating, One living God, without immediately dragging the ideal down to a purely human level.

Even the moderately religious Aristotle remarked that the work of direct creation would be quite unbecoming to God; and Plato and other Philosophers taught the same. Diogenes Laërtius states that Zeno said: "Nature is a habit moved from itself, according to seminal principles; perfecting and containing those several things which in determinate times are produced from it, and acting agreeably to that from which it was secreted." Even such a staunch Catholic as J. R. R. Tolkien was unhappy with the Church's doctrine of direct creation by the 'One True God', as we discussed in our investigation of the mythos that informed his ideas of 'sub-creation' which found their way into The Silmarillion and The Lord of the Rings.

It is encouraging to note the Hylozoism is making something of a comeback today, albeit in a small way and under the new name of 'panpsychism', as part of a growing tendency among some scientists to move away from a mechanistic view of the world. In 1990, an American physicist David Bohm (1917-1992) posited a new theory of consciousness based on Hylozoism. In the United Kingdom the case for panpsychism has been made in recent decades by Galen Strawson, Gregg Rosenberg and Timothy Sprigge.

There we must leave the subject of Hylozoism, which is only one branch of the complex tree of Philosophy which we have endeavoured to introduce to you in this three-part investigation. If we have encouraged you to explore the subject further and so add an important extra dimension to your occult studies our labours will be amply repaid.