The Egyptian Resurrection
A review of the parallels between the Christian and ancient Egyptian religions.
The story of Easter finds its parallel in the life, death and resurrection of the god Osiris, proving the close connection between the ancient Egyptian and Christian religions. Many scholars have pointed this out, most notably, Gerald Massey, who in his books, clearly demonstrates that the life and death of Jesus as historical fact was pre-figured in Egyptian mythology, centuries before the birth of the Saviour.

To understand the Egyptian resurrection, we need to bear in mind that the characters in the drama were never historical. Osiris was never a man on earth, as Jesus was. In one phase of the drama Osiris was the god in spirit who ruled over Amenta—the Egyptian 'heaven' and the souls of the dead. In another, he was the personified type of the god in matter—the Higher Self of man, whose emancipation from the bonds of matter and the cycles of reincarnation were symbolised in the sufferings of Osiris at the hands of Set and his conspirators.

We then see that the primary fact of the ancient Egyptian religion was the emergence of the human soul from the dead, physical body and its transformation into an eternal spirit in the afterlife. This is the foundation of the Egyptian Book of the Dead and the mystery dramas of the life and death of Osiris which were enacted in the temples of Egypt.

The transformations the soul of the deceased underwent in the Book of the Dead were emblematical of his defeat of the powers of darkness and his triumph over the vicissitudes of corporeal existence. On entering Amenta as a living, but still material being, he addresses the dwellers there in the character of those spiritual powers who helped Osiris triumph over his adversaries. The chief of these powers was Horus, in whose name he is assimilated to the Son of God, and thus is one with Horus in his resurrection from the dead.

The resurrection of Osiris in Annu (the Higher, spiritual realms) has been partially reproduced as the raising of Lazarus in the Gospels. Osiris in his coffin symbolised the soul imprisoned in matter. In the Book of the Dead he is portrayed in the likeness of a mummy, who is laid out in the burial-place as a corpse awaiting his resurrection from the funeral couch, or the transfiguration into the risen soul of the glorified. It is in this character that the deceased Egyptian entered into Amenta to represent the resurrection of the Osiris in the earth of eternity (see illustration below).

resurrection of osiris
The opening day of the New Year (which Easter celebrates), was known as 'The Day Come Unto Us' in Egypt; in other words it was the day of the resurrection of the Higher Self. It was also the resurrection of the sun from the grave of night; the re-arising of vegetation from the grip of winter, as we have seen in my article at left. In short, the Egyptian resurrection symbolised the renewal of Nature and all creation. This doctrine culminated in a resurrection of the human soul from the body of death that was imaged by the mummy of Osiris.

Having explained the main points of the Egyptian doctrine of the resurrection let us now examine a few of the many parallels between the Gospel story of Easter and the mysteries of Osiris.

The betrayal of Jesus by Judas at the last supper finds its counterpart in the betrayal of Osiris by his brother Set, or Sut. This took place at a banquet to which Osiris had been invited by Set, who had constructed a coffin just about the size of Osiris' body and brought it with him to the feast. As this was on the last night of Osiris' life, and on the last night of the Egyptian year, Osiris' funeral meal may fairly be called the Last Supper.

The similarities between the two suppers are made even closer when we learn that Set had renewed his attack upon Osiris on the night of laying the evening provisions upon the altar, known in Egypt as the night of the battle in which the forces of darkness were defeated and extinguished by the powers of Light.

As you may have deduced, the coffin of Osiris not only presaged his impending death at the hands of Set and his conspirators, but the entombment of the soul in the prison-house of the body. Dawn upon the coffin signalled the resurrection of Osiris on the third day, which shows that the evening meal, or Eucharist, was eaten in celebration of the resurrection and the transubstantiation of the body into spirit.

The night of laying provisions on the altar is mentioned twice in the Egyptian mystery drama of the death and resurrection of Osiris: firstly when he is in the coffin, secondly, after his resurrection. The Egyptians thus recognised two suppers, whereas the Bible story only mentions one.

There is an important episode in Easter story which I did not mention in my article for reasons which will now become apparent. This is the scene at the Last Supper in which Jesus washes the feet of the disciples. Washing the feet was one of the mysteries pertaining to the funeral of Osiris, when the feet of the followers of Horus were washed as part of the funeral ceremonies.

Osiris prayed that he might be buried quickly, just as Jesus did when he said to Judas: "That thou doest, do quickly." The wormwood or gall which was given to Jesus to drink on the cross, was also offered to Osiris by Set.

The mutilation of Osiris in his coffin, the stripping of his corpse and tearing it asunder by Set, who scattered the pieces all over Egypt, is represented by the stripping of the dead body of Jesus whilst it still hung upon the cross, and the parting of his garments amongst his despoilers, the symbolism of which I explained in my article at left.

Jesus' appeal to his Heavenly Father from the cross is perhaps the most pitiful and moving in the whole Easter story, made doubly so because his supplication was made in vain. This greatly troubled me as an ordained clergyman, as I'm sure it troubles many sincere Christians today. In the Egyptian religion the sufferings of Jesus on the cross find their close parallel in the sufferings of Horus at the hands of Set. But unlike the Gospel accounts of the crucifixion, Horus was not cruelly deserted by his Father in the great agony of his hour of need.

At the point in the Egyptian mythos when Horus has been wounded and blinded by Set, Ra, the Father-God, is with him to comfort and sustain him. He tenderly examines the bleeding wound and soothes him in his great affliction. Ra says to the gods, "Let him be laid upon his couch that he may recover." He also gives fire to his son to protect him, and consume the menacing darkness. Here we behold no helpless sacrificial victim; no vain and unavailing cry of the forsaken son that stuns the brain and scars the human conscience, but a loving, merciful Father who charges his angels to rescue his son and minister to his welfare.

In the Egyptian mythos, the body of Osiris was embalmed on 'the night of the laying-out', and Isis comes to lament over his corpse. But this is also the night on which he conquers his enemies. He rises, tramples on the bandages and conceals his body. This is closely paralleled in the Gospels, when the disciples find the tomb empty and the burial clothes lying discarded upon the floor.

Mary Magdalene next enters the sepulchre, and peering in, sees two angels in white sitting, the one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body had lately lain. This scene is reproduced in the vignettes of the Book of the Dead, where we see Isis and Nepthys, the sisters of Osiris, at the head and foot of the bier upon which the body of the god rests.

osiris on his bier
The great difference between the Christian and Egyptian accounts of the death of the Saviour is that in the former Jesus rises again in the flesh, to demonstrate the physical resurrection of the mummy. But, in the Egyptian original, the mummy is transformed into a spiritual body. In the Book of the Dead, the defunct declares: "I am spiritualised. I am become a soul. I rise as a God." It is this transformation into the spiritual double of the human body, which the Egyptians called the Ka, that has been omitted from the Gospels, and turned a metaphysical allegory into historical fiction.

The wounds of Jesus
Before I conclude this afterword I would like to address the criticism of an attentive reader who has questioned my arithmetic in regard to the number of wounds said to have been inflicted upon Jesus according to the Church's accounts of the crucifixion. In Eastern Christianity, the crucifixion is traditionally depicted with Jesus' feet side by side, and a separate nail for each making 4 wounds, whereas Western Christianity depicts the feet placed one above the other, both pierced by a single nail, making 3 wounds caused by 3 nails.

In my analysis of the allegory I have combined the two accounts, for both shed light on the hidden meaning of the crucifixion and its derivation from the Mystery Teachings of Egypt. If we add the wound in Jesus' side inflicted after his death (to test whether or not he was truly dead!!) the wounds or stigmata add to 4, though I am well aware that the Church generally counts them as 5—the so-called "Five Holy Wounds."

None of this negates the numerological symbolism of the crucifixion I have discussed in my article, for 5 is the number of a man and of mankind, as we may see in the pentagram or five-pointed star, emblematic of the five senses of man, the five occult elements, etc.

I hope this clears up any confusion in the minds of my readers, though I feel it necessary to add that it is not always possible nor desirable to dot every 'i' and cross every 't' in our investigations of Sacred Writ. Not least because if we explain every point the student does not learn to think by and for themselves, without which it is impossible discover the hidden meaning in sacred texts. So for that reason, if no other, I am indebted to the kind reader who raised this question.