The legend of St Mildred
In this afterword to our article we examine the legend of St Mildred recorded in the Acta Sanctorum and discover it is an accurate allegorical description of ancient metallurgy in Kent during the Bronze Age.
We owe this discovery to the excellent detective work of Helen. T. Sherlock, who in the 1930's, together with her colleague, Dr. Rendel Harris, wrote several essays on the legend of St Mildred. What she uncovered in the legend was Bronze Age industrial espionage by the British, who, as we shall see, succeeded in wresting the secret of smelting bronze from the metallurgists of Northern France.

Then as now, such industrial processes were closely guarded secrets, and this particular secret was as important in those times as the secret of nuclear fission in the 20th century, for it gave the British an immense advantage over tribes armed only with weapons of flint and stone. But before we consider the allegory, we must first tell you the legend of St Mildred in the form it has come down to us in the Acta Sanctorum.

We learn that St Mildred was a Saxon Princess, daughter of Domneva and a Prince of Mercia. Domneva sent her daughter Mildred, or Mildreth as she is also called, to be educated abroad. This name is of Egyptian origin, as we shall see later on.

Arrayed in the dress of her homeland the princess went to a convent somewhere in Northern France where she was warmly welcomed by Wilcoma, the abbess. Mildred became pestered by the attentions of a handsome young nobleman, related to the Abbess, who entreated Wilcoma to arrange that he might marry this English princess.

The abbess tried to persuade her, but Mildred said her mother had sent her there to be educated, not to be married and remained as firm as a rock. Nor did all the abbess' entreaties, threats and blows avail to persuade her to accept the young man.

The abbess was so furious at this refusal that she heated a furnace with a huge fire, pushed Mildred into it, and securely fastened the door. When the door was opened after three hours Mildred asserted her sanctity and came forth unhurt and dazzlingly beautiful. The abbess thereupon flung her to the ground, beat and stamped upon her and proceeded to pull out her hair by the roots.

This miracle promptly made Mildred the wonder of the age and confounded all her enemies. St Mildred took some of the hair and sent it with an appeal to her mother, whereupon Domneva shipped a fleet to bring her daughter home. The abbess refused to let the girl go, because she did not want the British to know how she had been treated.

The messengers of Domneva were hospitably received, but the day of their departure was delayed; for the abbess in her rage and hatred of the English persuaded the bishop that Mildred should remain in France for the honour of the country.

The sailors however, sent secret word to Mildred and one night she escaped and made her way safely to the ships. After they had gone a short way, however, she remembered with grief that she had left behind her most precious treasures and returned to the convent to get them, but when she reached the ships for the second time the tide was out and the ships stranded.

When the abbess discovered her absence she sent an armed force to get her back, but St Mildred's fervent prayers turned the tide and set the ships afloat. The rowers took to their oars, and with sails set the keels of their ships clove the waves, while the enemy in vain discharged their arrows and javelins across the water. After a pleasant voyage, they arrived at Ebbsfleet on the coast of Kent.

So much for the legend, which sounds like a fantastic fairy-tale, but Helen Sherlock and Dr. Harris assure us that it is not, and that every word of it is true. When you have read their explanation of it, which we have added to from information we have collected ourselves, you will no doubt agree with them and recognise the truth of the allegory.

Many of you will be familiar with the ways in which alchemists conceal their secrets beneath a cloak of allegory and symbolism, of which this legend is an excellent example. Let us examine it more closely. The first thing we notice is that Mildred's genealogy is not very convincing from a purely historic point of view. It was compiled by a monk of St Augustine's when she was received into the Christian Church.

It was perfectly natural to make her a Kentish Princess, but her mother seems to have no real place in history. Secondly, Mildred was sent abroad to Northern France, in the dress of her homeland, to be educated; in other words she was a raw material export and was warmly welcomed.

The French endeavoured to unite her with someone, or something, but without success for she remained 'as firm as a rock' (copper and tin). The abbess then tried drastic measures and she was thrown into a furnace with a great fire beneath, and after the door was closed she was left for three hours.

We can safely say she was smelted. When the doors were opened, Mildred asserted her sanctity and came forth in dazzling beauty; whereupon the abbess flung her to the ground, beat and stamped on her and pulled out her hair. In other words, she was moulded, and the hair was the fine filaments of asbestos which had adhered to the molten metal from the lining of the furnace, asbestos having been well known from the earliest times.

We next learn that the abbess refused to let her go, because she did not want the British to know how she had been treated. Naturally, every effort would have been made to prevent bronze implements and weapons being introduced into this country. The sailors however got her away with her precious treasures, which were the proper facilities and secret methods for producing the bronze at home. It is likely that the first metal works was at Ebbsfleet and this was St Mildred's own. A furnace in those days had the status of a church and thus Our Lady of Bronze became St Mildred.

Mildred or Mildreth has its alternative forms in the ancient Egyptian Mert-Reth which means 'beloved of the people.' It is probable that the original name was Ast(Isis)-Mert-Reth, for we learn from the legend that so sanctified was Mildred's life that the Holy Spirit was seen to rest upon her head in the form of a dove with outstretched wings around her neck. A clearer reference to the Isis headdress seen on many Egyptian goddesses could not be found. Later St Mildred's own convent was dedicated to St Mary who gradually took over all the Isis Temples and attributes in the British Isles, as she did elsewhere in Europe too.

A Cupola or Chapel was set up afterwards on Harty Island, which forms part of Thanet. The discovery of the Harty bronze implements was a great find in archaeological science, for the moulds in which the tools were cast are still intact. As we mentioned in our article at left, the word Harty has its Egyptian equivalent in Hati which means furnace and can hardly be distinguished from the English word. We may then say that Harty was one of the earliest sites for the Egyptian colonists in England and the centre of their metalworking activities.

Sherlock and Harris' investigations of this allegory have shown that the Christian Church has nothing to do with St Mildred, and it is with much protestation that ecclesiastical historians have been forced to include her in their records. When St Augustine landed at Ebbsfleet he found the cult so strong, that he was forced to adopt St Mildred as a colleague. Pope Gregory sent instructions to St Augustine to take over the heathen temples and destroy the idols in them; sprinkle them with Holy Water and place relics there.

St Augustine took over St Mildred's Temple, but he could not destroy the idol, indeed he deemed it more advisable to take her over as well and canonise her. She still retained her old Egyptian personality and became a saint without making the slightest concession to Christian convention. Externally she became St Mary the Virgin but within the church, the relics of St Mildred still retained their place of honour until, at a later date, they were removed to Canterbury, to the great dismay of the people of Thanet.