The Teaching of Ptah-Hetep
In this afterword, the author has selected a few maxims from the Teaching of Ptah-Hetep to reveal something of the hidden meaning contained in them.
Proem
The Teaching of Ptah-Hetep (also written 'Ptahhotep') is a collection of maxims attributed to Ptah-Hetep, First Minister (or 'Vizier') under King Assa (also written 'Isesi'), who flourished during the Fifth Dynasty, some 6,000 years ago. The word we translate as 'teaching' was 'Sabait' in ancient Egyptian, meaning 'words of the wise', and so they are, as we shall see.

The work survives in several incomplete papyri, the most well-known of which is the Prisse Papyrus, named after the French Egyptologist, Prisse d'Avennes, who discovered it. There are considerable differences between the Prisse Papyrus and the other copies which have come down to us, all of which contain errors and lacunae. The authors of this website, one of whom is a trained Egyptologist, have rectified these deficiencies, basing their emendations upon their knowledge of the inner meaning of Egyptian hieroglyphs and the Divine Mysteries. For these reasons, this translation differs in many particulars from the different versions to be found in books and on the Internet.

The judicious reader should bear in mind that the Teaching of Ptah-Hetep, like the other wisdom teachings of ancient Egypt, such as the Teaching of Amen-em-apt, the Instructions of Kagemna and the Book of the Dead, were never intended for public consumption, but only for the learned nobility and the priesthood. Moreover, this body of sacred literature was capable of three levels of interpretation; the literal or obvious, intended for the laity; the symbolical and allegorical, intended for those who had been trained to decipher the hidden sense behind the words; and thirdly, for the highest ranks of the priesthood—the great Initiates and Sages—who alone knew the inmost meaning of the texts.

It is my firm conviction, shared by the authors of this website that such teachings as those of Ptah-Hetep are the remnants of a vast body of sacred literature which once formed an important part of the curriculum of the Mystery Schools of ancient Egypt. It was by studying and meditating upon such teachings that the students in these schools learned the great Truths of Life and how to apply them in their daily lives.

Sadly, most of this literature has been lost through the depredations of the many invaders of Egypt over the last two millennia, culminating in the burning of the great library of Alexandria, which was the last repository of all that then remained of the written wisdom of Egypt. Nonetheless, what we do have, gives us a flavour of the high morality, learning and practical wisdom which sustained the Egyptian civilisation for longer than any other in history. Wisdom which is just as applicable today as it was when it was set down thousands of years ago.

seated scribe
The Teaching
I have selected just a few of the 30-odd maxims which are contained within the Teaching of Ptah-Hetep which best convey the practical nature of the wisdom of the ancient Egyptian Sages and their deep understanding of the human mind and heart, which have not changed much, if at all, in the 6000 years since these teachings were committed to writing!

"Magnify not thy heart because thou hast knowledge, neither fill thy heart with pride because thou hast understanding. Hold converse with the ignorant as well as the wise. No limit has been set to art, and no artist is fully master of his craft. Fine speech is hidden deeper than mother-of-emerald stone, and yet it is to be found among the women who grind flour at the mill."

I have endeavoured to follow this excellent advice all my life and encouraged my readers to do the same in the other articles in this series. For truth is found in the oddest places, often when we least expect it. Nor, as Ptah-Hetep tells us, is there ever any end to learning, here on earth, or elsewhere in God's Universe. Moreover, however wise we may think we are, and I make no claims in that direction, there are always those wiser than us, if we are prepared to learn and listen. In that connection I am reminded of the fact that God gave us two ears, two eyes and two nostrils, but only one tongue! Let us see what Ptah-Hetep says about this in his Teaching.

"To hear is the best of all qualities and beautiful affection springs into being thereby. How beautiful is it to see a son searching into the Teaching of his father; through this act he will attain to a good old age. The man who loves God will hear, but he whom God hates will not hear. Behold, it is the heart of a man that makes its possessor to hear or not to hear. The heart of a man is life, strength and health to him. Behold, he who has heard hears the word, and he who loves to hear is he who will speak goodly words. How beautiful it is when a son hearkens to the word of his father! He hath balance in his mind and body, and is honoured by his father!"

The person, on the other hand, who will not and does not listen, will never amount to anything. Ptah-Hetep tells us that the fool "looks upon the wise as one who knows nothing, and the qualities of virtue and excellence he considers to be defects. He does every kind of thing that is reprehensible, and these cause him to be abused daily. He lives upon that through which men die, and his bread is the corn of filth and abomination."

This is interesting, for 'that through which men die' reminds us of the wisdom of this world mentioned by Paul in his letter to the Corinthians: "For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God." If we follow that wisdom, as so many sadly do, whether it comes from the mouths of world leaders, scientists, politicians, or so-called 'influencers', we truly die, having learned nothing that will profit our Higher selves in this life, or the greater life to come.

"Follow the calling of thy heart as long as thou livest, and do not do more than is necessary to maintain thy estate. Waste not the time in which thou canst follow thy heart, for it is a hateful thing to the soul to deny its voice. Weary not thyself out concerning the affairs of the day, nor be anxious overmuch about thy house and estate; what will be will be, but time spent following thy heart is never lost." How true these words are! Do we not all know men and women who literally work themselves to death to build up a great business, or to acquire wealth or fame? What a fruitless waste of time it all is if it only profits us, for we surely cannot take it with us.

Ptah-Hetep has some good advice about lust which we can all profit by. "If thou wishest to maintain a permanent friendship in the house to which thou art in the habit of going, whether as master, or whether as brother, or whether as friend, or in fact in any place to which thou hast entry, beware of associating with the women. The place which they frequent is not good. The man who is not prudent follows after them. A thousand men seeking what is beautiful are destroyed by them. A man is made a fool of by their shining limbs, but they turn into things that are harder than quartzite sandstone. The pleasure is short, and passeth like a dream, and a man at the end thereof finds death through knowing it."

It goes without saying that what is sauce for the goose is good for the gander too, for women are no less immune from the temptations a well-formed body can exert upon the mind than men! Shakespeare gives much the same advice about lust in Sonnet CXXIX, when he tells us to: "shun the heaven that leads men to this hell."

"Incite not terror among the people, for it effects nothing; it is what God has decreed that cometh to pass." Ambitious politicians and would-be tyrants please take note! The following maxims of Ptah-Hetep all give practical advice about living that require little or no comment.

"Be not covetous when a division of property is made, and be not greedy, and what is thy due shall come to thee. Be not avaricious in thy dealings with thy kinsfolk. The prayer of the long-suffering man is greater than force, even though he be of no account among the people of his own time, and is destitute of the gifts of speech. Even a little avarice about matters of property will arouse hostility in the mildest of men."

"If thou wouldst be wise and prosperous establish thyself in the honourable estate of marriage. Love thy wife wholly and rightly. Fill her belly and clothe her back; oil for anointing is the medicine for her limbs. Make her heart to rejoice as long as thou livest; she is a profitable pasture for her lord. Enter not into disputes with her, for she will withdraw herself under duress and thou shalt lose both her trust and her love. Make her to prosper permanently in thy house. If thou art hostile to her she will become like unto a well which retreateth into itself."

"If thou wouldst be strong and respected of men, practise understanding and gentleness of speech. Command not except when thou canst guide; abuse brings a man to calamity. Be not haughty in thy heart, lest it be humbled. Keep not silence entirely, but take care as to what thou sayest and when thou sayest it. Let thy answers be concise and to the point. Put away all haste and unseemliness of speech so that thou mayest control thyself. Subdue the heated emotions of an ardent mind. The man who walks softly fashions his path aright."

"If thou hast become great, having once been lowly, and if thou hast acquired wealth, having once been destitute in the city where thou art known, forget not thy former condition. Be not attached to thy goods, which only come to thee as gifts of God. Thou wouldst not be superior to any other man if what has happened to thee had happened to him."

"If thou seekest the friendship of a man, ask not for it, but go to his house and pass the time with him alone, so that he may not be able to make his attitude to thee unpleasant. Talk wisely to him after a certain period. Discover his mind by conversing with him. If a subject arises about something that he has seen thee do, or if he does something that makes thee to be ashamed, hold thy peace and remain friendly to him; browbeat him not. Answer him with soft and conciliatory words. Do not abandon him and do not judge him for every man reapeth what he hath sown according to the ordinances of Maat."

'Maat' is an Egyptian word for which we have no exact equivalent which encapsulates all we understand by the words 'justice', 'righteousness', 'goodness', 'truth', 'balance' and more.

The following maxim may seem outdated, given that few of us possess any servants nowadays, although I know some people who employ Eastern European cleaners, gardeners and nannies whom they treat rather less kindly than the ancient Egyptians treated their servants! Moreover, if we are an employer than our employees are our servants. Employees may also be managers responsible for the staff under them.

"Satisfy thy servants whom thou trustest with thy possessions, so that they may feel as if they had been rewarded by God. If a man is niggardly in satisfying his trusted servants, he is declared to be a thievish person of no account whom it is justifiable to defraud and deceive. No man knoweth what a day may bring forth when he meditates in the morning. It is the Master who causeth peace to reign in his house, and his peace shall pacify his servants in the hour when trouble cometh upon him. Woe unto the house where the servants rule their Master, for when trouble cometh it will be the servants who announce it, to the ruin of both servants and Master."

Some readers will have noted that this maxim has a deeper meaning too. For the lower mind is a 'servant' we all possess, whether we are aware of it or not. We may even consider its various functions and duties to constitute a whole houseful of 'servants' for which we, that is, our Higher Self, is responsible. And woe indeed, as Ptah-Hetep tells us, when the servants have the upper hand in our house of the spirit!

I would like to end this all too brief survey of the Teaching of Ptah-Hetep with a maxim that I am sure you will all agree with. "Let thy face shine with cheerfulness as long as thou livest. When there comes forth from the storehouse one of those who went in at the distribution of bread and his face is set in a frown, he makes known the emptiness of his belly, and he becomes an enemy, being unsatisfied. Do not let any man approach thee and find thee with a gloomy face. A kindly smile is a better remembrance in the hearts of men than a gloomy frown."