The life and teachings of Plato
In this and our next two afterwords we briefly examine the life and teachings of Plato and his massive contribution to Western philosophy, science and Christian theology.
Plato (Platon, meaning "the broad shouldered") was born at Athens in 429 B.C., into a noble and wealthy family with a long lineage. His biographers tell us that the growing youth preferred the seclusion of philosophy to a career in public life which attracted so many of his contemporaries. Given the corruption which was then rife in the Athenian state and the many wars in which it was engaged, his preference seems an eminently sensible one!

Plato's spiritual apprenticeship began in earnest when he met Socrates at the age of twenty. Their relationship lasted for eight years and played a decisive role in the formation of his philosophical ideas. Except for a few anecdotes of questionable veracity no record has come down to us of this period of his early life. However, we cannot resist quoting one such, which even if untrue, has a poetic charm all of its own.

ONE night in the year 407 B.C., Socrates had a dream. He saw a graceful white swan flying toward him with a melodious song trilling from its throat. The next morning Plato came to him and asked to become his pupil. Socrates saw before him a handsome youth of twenty years, with the broad shoulders of an athlete, the noble brow of a philosopher and the limpid eyes of a poet. He knew that Plato belonged to one of the most illustrious families of Greece, being descended, on his mother's side, from the house of Solon, and with the blood of the ancient Kings of Attica flowing through his veins.

This was the beginning of a tender and intimate relationship which lasted until the day of Socrates' death. While other pupils formulated one-sided systems which but partially represented the ideas of Socrates, Plato used those ideas as seeds which he planted, nourished and developed in the rich soil of his own superior mind, making the full-blown blossoms a memorial offering to the simple nobility of his teacher.

Plato himself tells us nothing of his personal relationship with Socrates in his dialogues. Only once does he even name himself among the more particular friends of his teacher. But how he recognised in Socrates the perfected portrait of a wise man, how he found not only in his teaching but in his life and actions the most fruitful philosophical germs and hints, what influence the magnetic personality of his master and his way of life had for him; all this Plato has sufficiently demonstrated in his writings, by putting his own far more developed philosophical system into the mouth of his teacher as the centre of the dialogues, and the instigator and arbiter of the philosophical conversations in them.

After the death of Socrates in 399 B.C., fearing to be involved in the reaction that had now set in against philosophy, Plato left Athens and took up his abode at Megara, with his former fellow disciple, Euclid. Hitherto a pure disciple of the teachings of Socrates, he now, in consequence of his intercourse with other minds, began to develop his own philosophy.

From Megara Plato travelled to Cyrene, Egypt and Magna Graecia (present-day southern Italy) and Sicily. In Magna Graecia he was introduced to the teachings of Pythagoras, which, even 100 years after the death of the Sage of Samos, were still preserved in all their perfection. His stay among the Pythagoreans was very important for him and traces of Pythagorean philosophy run throughout Plato's writings. Some historians say he also visited Persia and Babylonia, where he was initiated into the Chaldean Mysteries. Others say that he went as far as India. All this is possible.

Whilst almost nothing is known of Plato's time in Egypt, we may safely say that like Pythagoras and others before him, he travelled there in search of the wisdom of the Hierophants of the Sacred Mysteries. In his The Secret Teachings of All Ages, Manly P Hall tells us that: "Plato was initiated into the 'Greater Mysteries' at the age of 49. The initiation took place in one of the subterranean halls of the Great Pyramid in Egypt. After a further three months' sojourn in the halls of the Pyramid, the Initiate Plato was sent out into the world to do the work of the Great Order, as Pythagoras and Orpheus had been before him."

How much truth there is in Manly P Hall's account we should not like to say, nor does it matter a great deal. To any occultist who has thoroughly studied Plato's writings, it is clear that he was unquestionably an initiate and the only place he could have gained his occult knowledge in those times was Egypt. His writings amply testify to the aims and scope of the Ancient Mysteries, which he rescued from the darkness into which they had fallen and attempted to restore to their original philosophic purity.

The reason Plato made several journeys to Sicily was because he hoped to influence the older and younger Dionysius—the tyrannical Greek rulers of the island—to put aside their despotic and cruel autocracy in favour of his ideal system of government. He failed in these attempts and incurring the enmity of the two rulers, Diogenes Laërtius tells us he was cast into prison and sold into slavery—a not uncommon fate in those times. Ransomed by a friend, he returned to Athens. He was now forty—which contradicts the account given by Manly P Hall, quoted earlier.

We incline to the view that Hall got his dates wrong, since no initiate ever entered on their teaching career before their initiation. We alluded to this in our article on Initiates and Initiation, in which we quoted the words of Theon of Smyrna, an initiate of the Eleusinian Mysteries who flourished in the first century A.D. In his book Mathematica he writes: "...after this (his initiation) the initiate becomes a torchbearer, or an hierophant of the Mysteries, or sustains some other part of the sacerdotal office." In other words, Manly P Hall put the cart before the horse, whether through careless scholarship, ignorance of the true facts, or to obfuscate the truth, we do not know.

In any event, when Plato returned to Athens, he soon gathered a circle of disciples around him. The place in which he taught was the Academy, a gymnasium outside Athens, where he possessed a garden inherited from his father, Ariston. We have very little information regarding the history of this school, which is not surprising as every genuine Mystery School has ever shrouded its activities in secrecy, if for no other reason than to protect it from vulgar scrutiny and interference.

The remainder of Plato's life passed smoothly, interrupted only by two more voyages to Sicily, in further attempts to persuade Dionysius the Younger to give up his dissolute ways and instigate a just and honest form of government. Unsurprisingly, his efforts were wasted on the corrupt sybarite who, like many of today's rulers, was devoid of either moral or humanitarian sensibility, and driven only by greed and ambition. So Plato returned to Athens, and as Cicero tells us, died in the midst of his intellectual labours at the advanced age of 81 in 347 B.C., surrounded by a crowd of his affectionate disciples. So much for the life of this illuminated sage, what of his teachings?

Although more than twenty-three centuries have elapsed since the death of Plato, the great minds of the world are still occupied with his teachings. He was, in the highest and fullest sense of the words, the interpreter and faithful amanuensis of the Ancient Wisdom, already hoary with age in his times. Hence, the wisdom he revealed, or rather re-stated, cannot be anything other than divine and eternal.

For Plato there was only one single object worthy of attainment: real, occult knowledge. He considered those only to be genuine philosophers, or students of truth, who possess the knowledge of that which really exists, in contradistinction to the mere seeming presented to man by his erring senses and material intellect. In short, the always-existing, in opposition to the transitory; and of that which exists permanently, in opposition to that which waxes, wanes, and is developed and destroyed alternately.

In this, he but echoed the teachings of the Egyptian Sages, from Hermes onwards, all of whom had taught that beyond all finite existences and secondary causes, all laws, ideas, and principles, there is an INTELLIGENCE or MIND, the first principle of all principles. This is the Supreme Idea on which all other ideas are grounded; the Monarch and Lawgiver of the universe; the ultimate substance from which all things derive their being and essence, the first and efficient Cause of all the order, harmony, beauty, excellency and goodness which pervades the universe, who Plato called, by way of pre-eminence and excellence, the Supreme Good, the "God over all" (ho epi pasi theos).

The Neoplatonic philosopher Porphyry who flourished in the 3rd century A.D., some 500 years after the Athenian Sage, assures us that the philosophy of Plato was taught and illustrated in the Greek Mysteries. Many scholars have questioned and even denied this claim. Some have gone so far as to assert that the Eleusinian Mysteries were little more than an empty show to titillate the imagination of the participants. As though the great and good of Athens and Greece would for twenty centuries and more have repaired every fifth year to Eleusis to witness a solemn religious farce! St. Augustine, whose writings were a major influence on the development of the early Christian Church, and whose opinions are worth a phalanx of those of his modern imitators, had no such reservations. He declares unequivocally that the doctrines of the Neoplatonists were the original esoteric teachings of the first followers of Plato.

He also explains the motives of the great philosopher for veiling the hidden sense of what he taught. He tells us that the accusations of atheism, the introduction of foreign deities, and corrupting Athenian youth, which were hurled against Socrates, afforded ample justification for Plato to conceal his doctrines. In later times, the peculiar jargon of the mediaeval alchemists which so puzzled early chemists was employed for similar purposes. It is for this reason that Plato tells us in his dialogues Gorgias and Phaedo that myths were the vehicles for concealing the great truths of life, and we have said the same in several of our articles. To both his critics and later commentators who, lacking any occult knowledge or training, such myths remained fictions, bereft of any but the most obvious and banal sense.

Basing all his doctrines upon the presence of the Supreme Mind, Plato taught that the nous, spirit, or rational soul of man, being "generated by the Divine Father," possessed a nature kindred, or even homogeneous, with the Divinity, and was capable of beholding the eternal realities. This faculty of contemplating reality in a direct and immediate manner belongs to God alone, whilst the aspiration for this knowledge constitutes what is really meant by philosophy—the love of wisdom. The love of truth is inherently the love of good; and so predominating over every desire of the soul, purifying it and assimilating it to the divine, thus governing every act of the individual, it raises man to a participation and communion with Divinity, and restores him to the likeness of God. "This flight," says Plato in the Theaetetus, "consists in becoming like God, and this assimilation is the becoming just and holy with wisdom."

The basis of this assimilation is always asserted to be the pre-existence of the spirit or nous. In the allegory of the chariot and winged steeds, given in Phaedrus, Plato represents the psychical nature as composite and two-fold; the thumos, formed from the substances of the world of phenomena; and the thumoeides, the essence of which is linked to the eternal world. Here we have the lower and Higher selves concealed under other names.

Plato taught that our physical life on earth is a fall and punishment. In this he erred, either because he did not know the complete scheme of material and spiritual evolution or because he chose to conceal it. We briefly discuss the 'Fall' of man in our investigation of J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings in which we say: "...the first 'Fall' of spirit into matter refers to the fact that spirit has to clothe itself in matter in order to develop self-consciousness. Spirit in its ultimate constitution is an unconscious negative abstraction. Its purity is inherent, not acquired by merit. Therefore it is necessary for each individual Ego to attain to full self-consciousness as a human, conscious Being, through the process of reincarnation in a series of material bodies." From this it is clear that physical life on earth is not a punishment, but a vital and necessary stage in the evolution of man to a higher state.

But when Plato says that "the soul dwells in the grave which we call the body," and in its incorporate state, and previous to the discipline of education, the spiritual element is "asleep," we fully agree with him. Earthly life is a dream, rather than a reality, as Shakespeare tells us in the Scottish play. We are like the captives described in Plato's Allegory of the Cave in the Republic which we quoted in the afterword to our final article in our occult studies course, with our backs turned to the light. We perceive only the shadows of objects, and mistake them for actual realities.

This is the same idea of Maya, or the illusion of the senses in physical life, which is such a marked feature in Buddhist and Hindu philosophy. But these shadows, if we have not given ourselves up absolutely to the sensuous nature, arouse in us the memory of that higher world that we once inhabited. Plato tells us that: "the interior spirit (the Higher Self) has some dim and shadowy recollection of its antenatal state of bliss, and some instinctive and proleptic yearnings for its return." This too is true.

He adds that it is the province of philosophy to disenchant the soul (Higher Self) from the bondage of the physical senses, and raise it into the empyrean of pure thought, to the vision of eternal truth, goodness, and beauty.

"The soul," he says in the Theaetetus, "cannot come into the form of a man if it has never seen the truth. This is a recollection of those things which our soul formerly saw when journeying with Deity, despising the things which we now say are, and looking up to that which REALLY IS. Wherefore the nous, or spirit, of the philosopher (or student of occult science) alone is furnished with wings; because he, to the best of his ability, keeps these things in mind, of which the contemplation renders even Deity itself divine. By making the right use of these things remembered from the former life, by constantly perfecting himself in the perfect mysteries, a man becomes truly perfect—an initiate into the diviner wisdom." All this affirms the teachings of Occult Science and is excellent in every way.

This discussion of the teachings of Plato is continued in the afterword to part two of this investigation.