The Wisdom of India
In the accompaniment to this investigation we explore and explain the occult truths to be found in the sayings and parables of the Sages of ancient India
As we said in our introduction to this first part of our investigation, it is the sublime philosophical ideas to be found in the sayings and parables of the Sages of ancient India that expound and explain the true science and art of yoga. We begin part one of our three accompaniments with a well-known Buddhist parable which we have rendered in our own words, the better to uncover the concealed truths within it.

Kisagotami and the Mustard Seed
There was once a young woman named Kisagotami who bore a man-child, fair of face and lithe of limb, the apple of her doting eye. Straying one day from home he found a snake which twined about his wrist. Whereupon he laughed and teased the quick-forked tongue and opened mouth of that cold playmate.

Alas! The rearing serpent struck, and before long the child turned pale and still. Kisagotami found him lying in a grove of trees and could not think why he should cease to play. She wrapped him in her trembling arms and kissed his cold, moist brow. A passing traveller who saw them said, "the child is sick of poison;" and another, "He will surely die."

But Kisagotami, who could not bear to lose her precious boy, asked for medicine which might bring the light back to his shadowed eyes. "It was so very small, that kiss-mark of the serpent," said she through scalding tears, "and I think it could not hate him, gracious as he was, nor hurt him in his innocent sport."

And someone said, "There is a holy man upon the hill. Look! now he passes in the saffron robe. Ask of him if there be a cure for that which ails your son." So Kisagotami came trembling to the Sage, whose brow was like a very god’s, his stately form enwreathed with light. Softly weeping, she drew the face-cloth from her babe, asking shyly what medicines might save him from the grave.

And Sakyamuni, the Buddha, for it was he, gazed with gentle eyes upon her, saying, "Yes little sister, there is that which might heal — you first, and him thereafter, if you could but find the thing which is needful to effect a cure. Therefore, I ask you, bring mustard-seed; only be sure you do not take it from any hand or house where father, mother, child, or slave has died." Thus did the Compassionate Lord speak unto the grieving mother.

Forth went Kisagotami, clasping the baby to her breast, grown ever colder with each passing step, and asked at the threshold of every humble hut, "I beseech you of your grace, give me mustard-seed." And every one who had it gave right willingly, for the poor are piteous to the poor. But when she asked, "Have any here by chance or accident died — husband, or wife, or child, or slave?" they answered "O Sister! what is this you ask? Alas, the dead are very many, and the living few!"

So with downcast eyes and sad thanks Kisagotami gave the mustard back and asked of others; but they said, "Here is the seed, but we have lost our slave!" Still others said, "Here is the seed, but my beloved wife is dead!" On she went with weary feet, the child now icy cold upon her breast, but always came the same refrain. "Here is some seed, but he that sowed it died before it could be harvested!"

Empty-handed Kisagotami returned to the Holy One. "Ah, sir," she cried, "I could not find a single house with mustard-seed where none had died! Therefore I left my child — who would not suck nor smile — beneath the wild-vines by the stream, to seek your face and kiss your feet, and ask where I might find this seed and find no death, if now, indeed, my baby is not dead, as I do fear, and as they said to me."

"My sister! you have found what few ever find," the Master said, his eyes alight with joy ne'er seen on darkling earth. "Through bitter balm and sore travail thy feet have entered the path that leads to immortality. Yesterday, he whom you loved slept dead upon your bosom. Today he awakes to life anew among his kindred. It is but his body that lies in your arms; his immortal soul dwells elsewhere, far from the cares and sorrows of this world. Bury his body in the earth and rejoice that his soul is safe returned to heaven!"

"Those who seek the peace that passeth all understanding should draw out the arrow of lamentation, and complaint, and grief. Those who have drawn out the arrow and have become composed in mind will obtain peace, and all sorrow will depart from them. Over such death has no power, nor can grief find a lodging in their hearts for inner peace casts out all earthly illusions." So saying, the Holy One smiled upon Kisagotami and blessed her, and went on his way.

asterisks
We need say little about this Buddhist parable, which speaks for itself. What is odd about the several versions of it to be found online and in print is that none of them (so far as we are aware) recognise that it is an allegory of the non-existence of death. Instead they seem to treat it as an illustration of "the universality of suffering" and "how to cope with grief." Given that the Buddha was a Brahmin by birth and an initiated yogi, it would be very surprising indeed if these pedestrian interpretations were the message he intended to convey to his followers. But there you are; as we have said in so many of our articles, truth is for the few, it's shadow for the many.

This proves, if proof were needed, that the ancients were in the habit of putting the great truths into simple words by means of parables. We emphasise the word 'simple' as complexity is ever the enemy of truth. But it is also true that if one is not aware of the hidden meaning in these little tales, then the simplicity of the words escapes us, and we see their outward appearance only. And so the hidden teachings remain...hidden. So, bearing this important observation in mind, let us look at another simple story from the Wisdom Teachings of ancient India which is filled with concealed truths.

Acts and knowledge
One day, Sutikshna, a Brahmana, whose mind was full of doubts, went to the hermitage of Agasti and asked the Sage respectfully: "Oh great sage! That art informed in all the ways and truths of virtue, and knowest with certainty all the Shastras [sacred texts]; I am in a great doubt about something which I pray you will kindly remove. Tell me whether a man's acts or his knowledge or both of these, is in your opinion, the cause of his emancipation."

Agasti answered the lady: "As the flight of birds in the air is effected by means of both their wings, so emancipation is attained through the instrumentality of both knowledge and acts. It is neither our acts nor our knowledge alone that produces the highest state of emancipation, but both together are known as the means of it."

asterisks
Another very simple story, is it not? But does it fully answer Sutikshna's question? We should say it does not. To do so we should need to know what is really meant by 'knowledge' and 'acts'. So, perhaps this story is not such a simple one after all! Let us look at another Indian tale which may shed light on the true nature and meaning of knowledge and acts. The explanatory interpolations in square parenthesis are ours.

Bharadwaja and the Brahman
There was once a seeker after Truth called Bharadwaja who asked a very learned Brahman to enlighten him upon the conditions of attaining liberation in this life, so that he will be happy ever after, not being compelled to return to earth again once he has left it. This is what the Brahman told him.

"Know that all worldly conditions are as varied as the various hues that enrich the firmament at times, and they are just as evanescent as worldly events and scenes, as well as conditions. It is better therefore to efface them and send them into oblivion, forgetting at the same time the outward self [lower mind or self, body and personality], which is as much an illusion as all the rest. All visible objects on earth are absolute negation; we have no idea of them save from observation.

"Some saints have referred to all those things as vanities, which they are, and what greater vanity can there be than to wish to perpetuate for evermore the non-existing individual we think is our real Self? To give way to the belief that you, Bharadwaja, have attained to such perfection that you have earned the reward of remembering and perpetuating Bharadwaja for ever and for ever, is to yield to an intolerable conceit at which the very gods themselves will shudder in dismay.

"What acts have you performed on earth to entitle you to the everlasting remembrance of these acts, which make up the sum total of that [ego or personality] which now is known as Bharadwaja? How much knowledge and wisdom are contained within your outer [lower] mind that you should wish never to lose that knowledge and wisdom any more?

"But the conviction of the non-existence of the objects of vision, as well as of the wandering thoughts that flit within our mind like bats at eve when in search of a belated insect between the branches of a tree, that conviction leads to the effacing of all those impressions from our minds. And the mind, thus perfected, will beget realisation of the truth that nothing on earth is permanent but that permanency lies elsewhere, in bliss and joy.

"The desires which uphold our living bodies and minds bind us fast as by invisible strings to our bodily prison. These being loosened, the imprisoned soul [Higher Mind] is liberated as a bird from its cage. But desires are of two kinds: pure and impure. The impure ones cause reincarnation, while the pure ones serve to destroy this necessity.

"An impure desire is like a mist of ignorance, consisting in the feeling of an obdurate egoism. This also causes rebirth. On the other hand, a pure desire will reach the Eternal Self [Divine Soul] that dwells on High; and the Eternal Self will receive it and use it for its own purposes, which are to serve man on earth and man above, before the final goal is reached by him. And those pure desires will await the traveller when he once has started on his journey upwards, and they will be to him as so many treasures which will open the portals that conceal the Heavens from his view.

"The greatest act of all is magnanimity, no matter how applied. It is also the rarest act that man performs, and it may consist in neither giving an affront nor re-acting to it when it is offered. Magnanimity is above all worldly conditions, for these cannot affect it if the mind is truly great. All virtues depend upon it, for without magnanimity there can be no virtue. For instance: no brave man can ever consider a man who injures him as being superior to himself, for he has the power to make himself superior by forgiving the one who injured him.

"The magnanimous man is neither rash nor timorous, for he fears nothing he ever undertakes and dares anything but causing harm to another. It is above generosity, above love, above mere kindness, though all these are great acts too; acts that lead to liberation from rebirth. Magnanimity leads to purity of morals, and this attunes us with the superior beings who dwell Above. And it is true that every pure thought is a glimpse of God, for purity lives and derives its life from the Spirit of God.

"The mind is like a fountain, and if the stream of good thoughts is to be clean, and pure, and magnanimous, then we must see to it that the fountain is clean first. Purity of heart and mind is a test; the rest can be left to Heaven and its judges. And if purity dwells within the heart and mind, nothing ill can find entrance there, for both combine to form a temple in which even the Eternal Self [Divine Soul] can dwell for a space and behold its lower part, the imprisoned soul [Higher Mind], with approval.

"Pure acts and thoughts are like a soft rebuke which evil cannot endure, and the very angels will stoop down and send blessings on him whose mind and acts are pure. Has not a wise man in ancient Greece said: 'I pray thee, O god, that I may be beautiful within'? Here then we have two acts — magnanimity and purity — that lead us to the realms of God."

asterisks
This narrative provides clear answers to the questions posed by Sutikshna and Bharadwaja; answers filled with the Wisdom of the right sort. Not only did the Brahman alleviate the doubts of his petitioners and enlighten their understanding, he also answered a number of other questions which many seekers ask, such as what part (if any) of their earthly personality continues after death; a subject Bombast and Flitterflop explored in the fourth of their Astral Conversations. It is just such elevated discourses as the one we have shared with you that were the foundation for the Art and Science of yoga discussed in our investigation.

We shall continue our exploration of the occult truths to be found in the sayings and parables of the Sages of ancient India in the next part of this accompaniment to be published in two months' time.