The Path to Wisdom

The following extract has been taken from The Teachings of Li Wang Ho which can be read in full on this website. Here the Chinese Sage succinctly describes the path to Wisdom and how to attain it.
"To have complete Wisdom is to present an unruffled countenance under all extremities of joy and disaster, but the acquisition of true Wisdom is necessarily of slow growth. We cannot force the seed to develop quicker by continually digging it up in order to watch its progress. Therefore we must wait patiently for Wisdom to grow within our minds by opening our hearts to the warm rays that are ever shining in the effulgence of our Souls; listening carefully all the time for the occasional whisper of love and enlightenment that may travel along one of these rays and illumine us with some Holy Precept.

"It is, alas, too true that to those who will not hear, a loving word is as useless as the singing of a multitude of Angels before the Evil One; but it is also true that Fate will force them one day to listen . . . . but then the teachings will be very severe and the path long and steep and full of ruts and pitfalls. Therefore: practise virtue every moment of the day, for its voice is louder than the voice of a roaring tiger, and it will be heard by the Spirits of divine Light and Love.

"The Lords of Destiny place our feet on neutral ground from which three roads radiate. One leads to wilful sin; one to dull ignorance; and one to intelligent knowledge, leading to Sage-hood in the end—if we will. Which way shall we go? Only we can decide—but after the decision Fate takes a hand and rewards us at the end of the road according to the direction we have taken. And the choice should not be too difficult for us; for the wise do not stoop to dig in the earth, breaking their fingernails searching for an occasional worm wherewith to assuage their pangs of hunger, when the branches of Heaven's Benevolence are laden with luscious fruit, to which we have only to stretch out a hand in order to pluck it and satisfy ourselves. Nor is he who stands idle between worm and fruit, gaining neither the material nor the spiritual, the one who shall gain entrance to the Land of Ever-growing Delight.

"Truly, we can see by the Sun in which direction lies the road to our goal, but it is only by means of our weary feet that we can reach it. Dreaming about this will not forward us one furlong; for in dreams we may amass the greatest riches and soar to power, but in the waking state it is sometimes very difficult to find sufficient cash for a night's lodging in a mud-hovel!

"We must act; live according to the rules of the wise, or according to the words of the pilot within the cabin of our hearts.

"But it is not sufficient to act when we are led in this manner, or driven; for even the seed of the lowly thistle may be blown up to heaven by a gust of wind—but it must inevitably fall down to earth again, however slowly; for there is no merit in being carried.

"We must strive mentally and spiritually of our own accord, and rise by our own volition. That is the only way in which to storm the Gate and gain Entrance among the Heavenly Ones!

"Dwell in the purity of Peace, so that your Inner Self shall be ONE with God. For as outer cleanliness is the symbol of a pure mind, so shall Inner Purity be the emblem of the highest Man can conceive, thus enabling him to perceive his Immaculate Creator.

"And, finally, remember that when it seems to you that the way to Heaven is too steep and too far, that even an ant may climb to the top of a mighty oak; although a mouse will have to perform many great deeds before he will be regarded with the same respect as the tiger!"