The Wisdom of Pythagoras
To complement our review of Iamblichus' Life of Pythagoras (see left), we have selected the most important of the Golden Verses attributed to the Greek Sage which sum up the essence of his teachings in a few lines
The origin of these maxims which we have freely rendered into our own words is unknown but they are thought to have been composed in third century B.C. by Pythagoras' followers.

First worship the Immortal Gods, as they are established and ordained by Universal Law.

Do nothing evil, neither in the presence of others, nor privately, but above all things be true to thyself.

Observe justice in all thy actions and words and accustom thyself never to act without reason and forethought.

In all the calamities that men may suffer through divine fortune, accept thy lot with equanimity and patience, whatever it may be and never complain about it. Yet endeavour with all thy might to remedy it. And consider also that fate does not send the greatest portion of these misfortunes to good men.

For there are among men many different minds, both good bad and indifferent. Be neither too quick to admire some nor reject others, for there is wisdom in the foolishness of the wise and folly in the wisdom of fools.

If falsehoods are uttered, hear them with mildness, and arm thyself with patience. Observe well, on every occasion, what I am going to tell thee:

Let no man either by his words, or by his deeds, ever seduce thy mind from the pursuit of what is Good and True. Nor let him entice thee to say or to do what is not profitable unto thee. Consult and deliberate before thou act, that thou mayest not commit foolish actions. For it is the part of a fool to speak and to act without reflection.

Strive to do that which will not afflict thee afterwards, nor oblige thee to repent of either thy words or deeds. Neither do anything which thou dost not understand.

In no wise neglect the health of thy body; but give it drink and meat in due measure, and also the exercise of which it has need that will not incommode thee.

Accustom thyself to a simple mode of life that suffices for all thy needs without recourse to luxury. Likewise, eschew all things that will arouse envy. Neither be covetous nor stingy; a modest competence is better than poverty or riches.

Never close thy eyes in sleep until thou hast examined all thy actions of the day. What have I done amiss? What have I done well? What have I omitted that I ought to have done or done that I ought to have omitted? If in this examination thou find that thou hast done amiss, reprimand thyself severely for it and strive to do better. And if thou hast done good, rejoice and strive to increase it. But see thou dost not give way to vain regrets, neither be ashamed for there is no profit in self-pity. If thou wilt practise such examination thoroughly each day it will increase thine own virtues and draw greater ones to thee that thou knowest not of.

Never begin any task without first asking the Gods to help thee accomplish it. When thou hast made this prayer habitual thou wilt know the constitution of the Immortal Gods and of men. In this wise thou shalt learn how far the different Beings extend and what contains and binds them together. Likewise shalt thou learn that all things are one, according to universal Law.

I would have thee know that men draw their own misfortunes upon themselves of their own free will and their own free choice. Unhappy wretches all! They neither see nor understand that their God is near to them. Few know how to deliver themselves from their misfortunes. Such is the fate that blinds a man and takes away his sense. Like helpless leaves driven by the winds of their passions, they roll to and fro, always oppressed with ills innumerable. For fatal strife, innate, pursues them everywhere, tossing them up and down; nor do they perceive the causes of it.

O Heavenly Father! If Thou would'st deliver men from all the evils that oppress them, show them the spirit of falsehood that dwells within their breast and how it uses and abuses them!

But take courage; the race of men is Divine. Holy Nature shows them all her mysteries. If she impart to thee her secrets, thou wilt easily perform all the things which I have enumerated. And by the healing of thy soul, thou wilt deliver it from every evil and every affliction.

If thou wilt nicely examine all thy thoughts and actions, being ever guided and directed by the understanding that comes from above, and holding in check as with reins the passions and desires that come from below, then when, after having divested thyself of thy mortal body, thou arrivest at the Haven of Salvation, thou shalt be a god, immortal, incorruptible, and Death shall no more have dominion over thee.