The life and teachings of Plato 2
In the second of our afterwords we continue our examination of the life and teachings of Plato.
It has been assumed erroneously that Plato was entirely free from any element of Eastern Philosophy in his writings, and that every modern scholar, without being a mystic and an occultist themselves, can pretend to be a judge of Ancient Esotericism. That Plato was undeniably an ardent admirer and follower of Pythagoras no one will deny. It is equally undeniable, as stated by Professor M. J. Matter, of the Royal Academy of Strasbourg, that: "It is in Pythagoras and Plato that we find, in Greece, the first elements of Oriental Gnosticism."

Plato had on the one hand inherited the doctrines of Pythagoras, and on the other hand drawn his wisdom from the same sources as the Samian Philosopher. The doctrines of Pythagoras are partly Brahmanical, and partly Egyptian; for this great Philosopher studied in both India and Egypt. Plato makes the same profession in his Epistles in which he says he has taken his teachings "from ancient and sacred doctrines." Furthermore, the ideas of both Pythagoras and Plato coincide too well with the philosophies of India and Egypt to admit any doubt of their origin by anyone who has any real acquaintance with these systems.

The early Fathers of the Christian Church were thoroughly instructed in Platonic Philosophy and comprehended its essential unity with that of India and ancient Egypt, and this is the reason the elements of these two systems predominate so strikingly in the Gospels and the Jewish Scriptures. Philosophy, Science, Religion, Art and Ethics were interwoven subjects for Plato. They arose from the Ancient Teachings of India, via Chaldea, Egypt and Greece, whence they passed to the Arabian scientists and philosophers. It was they who introduced the teachings of Alchemy and Magic into Europe during the 'Dark Ages'—which were not really as 'dark' as some people imagine. This in turn resulted in the European Schools of Magic, Alchemy and Philosophy of the Middle Ages.

Plato claimed no originality for his ideas. He was, in every sense, the world's interpreter. Like H. P. Blavatsky, he gave a new unity to ancient and scattered truths. His work was the string which tied together the nosegay of precious blossoms which had been culled from the gardens of the world's best thinkers. Without Plato, the Socratic method of education would be unknown. Without Plato, the abstruse numerical system of Pythagoras would have remained unintelligible to the average mind. Without Plato, the philosophical and psychological systems of Patanjali, Kapila and Vyasa, the laws of Manu and the Buddhist doctrine of emanation, would have remained hidden from the Western world. Plato was the link between the East and the West. As Emerson says, "The excellence of Europe and Asia is in his brain. Metaphysics and natural philosophy expressed the genius of Europe; he substructs the religion of Asia as the base."

As we discussed in our previous afterword, Plato was an Initiate of the Mysteries, which obliged him to veil many of his more abstruse teachings in symbolical language. His great veneration for the Mysteries and the responsibility he felt toward them made him guard their inmost secrets with jealous care. Once, when he was accused of making a vague communication, he answered, "I purposely spoke enigmatically, that in case the tablet should have happened with any accident, a person without some previous knowledge of the subject might not be able to understand its contents." He communicated his most profound teachings orally and only to his initiated disciples, who in turn passed them down from generation to generation of similarly pledged disciples.

Plato presented his philosophy in the form of dramatic dialogue. He spreads the charm of an exhaustless fancy over the subtle controversies of his characters, filling them with humour, exuberant imagery, delicate sarcasm and friendly banter. Throughout his lines, however, runs the unbroken thread of a deep and penetrating philosophy. Starting with universal principles and descending therefrom into particulars, he developed a system of thought which embraced the evolution of worlds and species, the correlation and conservation of forces, the development and transmutation of physical forms, and the indestructibility of both spirit and matter.

Plato knew that the Higher Self in man is concerned with causes rather than effects. It is the presence of this Higher Self which makes a man ask the immediate cause of a certain effect, then for the cause of that, until he finally arrives at that Cause which lies behind all others. Although postulating the existence of this Causeless Cause, Plato wisely refrained from any description of its nature, for how can a mere man, however wise, describe the indescribable and unknowable? But this does not prevent us, as seekers after Truth, recognising in Plato's "Unchangeable Existence" the "One" and "All" of Hermes, which at stated intervals becomes the cause of Becoming and Manifestation.

Barely mentioning this Absolute Negation, Plato started by considering its two aspects, which constitute the basis of conditioned existence. He described the universal substratum of primordial substance as the "Unlimited," considering it as that indefinable "Something" from which all forms of matter emanate and into which they will eventually return. "That in which all things appear, grow up and disappear is Space," he said, at the same time making it clear that Space is animated by eternal, ceaseless Motion. He did not conceive this Motion, however, as a blind, unreasoning force, but identified it with Deity, tracing the word Theos back to a verb meaning "to move."

Plato taught that the visible universe is but the concrete image of an ideal abstraction, built on the model of the first Divine Idea. We find him distinctly stating that everything was evolved out of the eternal and invisible WILL, which contains within itself the Idea of the world to be created, the Idea being produced out of itself. As we learnt in part one of this investigation, he declared that behind all existences and secondary causes, behind all laws, ideas and principles, there is Intelligence. This is the Universal Mind in its Cosmic aspect, reflecting itself as the Higher Self in man.

The immortality of the soul forms the central theme of Plato's philosophy. In his Phaedo he unfolds all the arguments in favour of this premise, and refutes all objections. He shows that the soul is neither dependent upon the body for its existence nor affected by its dissolution. With irrefutable logic he demonstrates the necessity for reincarnation, and shows that knowledge itself is nothing more than memory. The doctrine of cause and effect runs like a golden thread throughout his writings. Although admitting that man is seemingly the victim of circumstances, he proves that in reality man is their master, for what we attune with in thought and deed, we become. This is not the doctrine of Karma, as it popularly MISunderstood by Theosophists, occultists and mystics alike, but attunement, as we point out in our occult studies course.

Occult students are sometimes confused by the different terms Plato used in describing the various aspects of the soul. What we call the Divine Soul, Plato describes as the rational spiritual soul, defining it as the "motion that is able to move itself." When he says that "soul is the most ancient of all things," he is referring to the unity of Soul and Higher Self, before the Higher Self's descent into matter, and after its final liberation from reincarnation on earth. When he speaks of the nous in man, he is describing the Higher Self—the reincarnating Individuality or Ego.

Sometimes Plato divides the soul into two parts, at other times into three. His twofold division of soul refers to the two selves or minds we discuss in the first part of our occult studies course, the Higher Self being divine and immortal, the lower self material and perishable. The occult students among our readers will understand this statement, for they know that their earthly personality perishes after the death of the body while the incorruptible Higher Self becomes more purified with each incarnation. When Plato divides the soul into three parts he mostly (but not always) refers to the trinity of Soul, Higher Self and lower self or body.

Following the method used in the Mysteries, Plato's pupils began their discipline by purifying the lower self, that is learning to control their thoughts and desires and attain a balance between the material and spiritual as we discuss in our article on Inner Peace through applied Wisdom. This process strengthens the lower mind, which then gravitates toward the Higher Self, itself indissolubly connected with its "Father in Heaven", the Divine Soul. Plato promised his pupils that this form of discipline would eventually free them from the bonds of the senses and the passions of the lower self. But he also warned them that if this discipline were neglected and the Higher Self were allowed to sink deeper and deeper into matter by gravitating toward the lower self and body, the time would come when the Higher Self itself would be lost.

Plato's philosophy is ethical above all else, based upon the idea of man's free will and power of choice. He claims that it is this power of choice which determines a man's parentage, his hereditary tendencies, his physical constitution and his early education, since all of these things are merely the effects of choices made in former lives. These choices also determine the man's stage of evolution, show the position he should occupy in the well-ordered state, and indicate the particular virtue necessary for his immediate development. The whole problem of evolution, according to Plato, is one of ethics. As the ultimate aim of every man is to free himself from the tyranny of his lower nature, and as this can only be accomplished through the efforts of the individual, each man is the arbiter of his own destiny. For each of us has the free will to develop those virtues which are most necessary for our evolution.

The natural inequalities among men, due to their past choices, divides them, in Plato's view, into three classes. The first class lives in its sensations. The particular virtue to be developed by this class of people is temperance, or moderation. The second class is entangled in its passional nature. These people are the slaves of their pains and pleasures, their hopes and fears. They must develop courage and fortitude, virtues which will enable them to meet all the vicissitudes of life with equanimity and patience. The third and highest class is made up of those men who have gained control over their lower nature and who live naturally in the Higher mind. These men should aspire to wisdom, or spiritual knowledge.

It will be obvious that one could divide humanity into 30 or 300 classes and not cover all the possible and probable differences between them, but Plato's division into three has the merit of both simplicity and truth, as you will know if you study your fellow human beings. It is possible that Plato learned this fundamental truth in Egypt, or India, both civilisations that developed caste systems based on similar divisions, though in the case of India, the original reasons for this were lost, with the terrible results we see today where the higher castes prey upon and abuse the lower, despite the best (or worst) efforts of the government to eradicate the caste system.

Nonetheless, the principle is a good one, for as we have pointed out in several of our articles, and Plato clearly knew, the much-vaunted modern concept of 'equality' is a dangerous delusion with no basis in universal law. Men and women are profoundly unequal in every way: physically, emotionally, mentally and spiritually because each is at a different stage in their evolution, as Plato knew and taught.

After analysing the three divisions of the soul and the three classes of individuals who correspond to them, Plato then turns his attention to the State, which is merely a collection of individuals. We say the same in our article on How Peace leads to war. Plato believed that the ideal state should be divided up into three classes of citizens, each class having its own particular duty to be performed and its special virtue to be developed. When each class concentrates upon its own duty and virtue, there will result a well-balanced and harmonious state in which all will work, not for themselves alone, but for the common good of the whole.

The lowest class in Plato's ideal state is composed of those men whose interests are focused in their sensations. These are the labourers and artisans, whose immediate task it is to acquire skill in action upon the physical plane. The second class is composed of those who, having dominant passional natures, are constantly at war in themselves. Plato would make these men the warriors of the nation, thus giving them the opportunity to develop the courage and fortitude necessary at their stage of evolution. The ruling class is made up of those who have learned how to govern themselves, and are therefore fitted to govern others. As he says in the Republic, "unless philosophers become rulers or rulers become true and thorough students of philosophy, there will be no end to the troubles of states and of humanity."

There will no doubt be some among our readers who find these ideas both 'elitist' and abhorrent. We have no wish to change their minds, though we would point out to them that there is nothing demeaning or inferior in being a labourer. Nor is the ideal philosopher envisioned by Plato superior to those who work in the fields, on a building site, or cleaning drains. All are equally necessary in a well-ordered society and each performs a vital function. Is a blood cell 'inferior' to the heart whose function depends upon it? Is a drone in a beehive inferior to the Queen without which it would perish for lack of nourishment? Let us look to the laws of Nature for our inspiration as to how a state should be organised and governed and not to the laws of men, which are often unjust, ill-conceived and ineffectual.

Plato's ideal state was modelled after the form of government which prevailed in the Golden Age, when the young and growing nations of the earth were governed by wise King-Initiates. In this, men but followed the Divine Order and Laws of the Universe under a greater King, the Father of All. Now they follow their own mistaken fancies, prompted by the lowest desires and passions of their animal selves. You decide which is the better, fairer and wiser system!

In the final part of this investigation we conclude our discussion of the teachings of Plato.