The Faust Legend
In this commentary we examine the legend of Faust to uncover the meaning it has for us all in these times of test and trial.
The legend of the student who sells his soul to the Devil in return for occult knowledge and power is as old as man. It first became widely-known in the early 17th century when Christopher Marlowe based his famous drama—The Tragical History of the Life and Death of Doctor Faustus—on the legend. He drew on many tales about people who had sold their souls to the Devil. One of the oldest is that of Theophilus of Adana who is said to have made a compact with the Devil to obtain an ecclesiastical position in the 6th century. Many people are still making pacts with the Devil today, and not just within the Church, as we shall see.

There was even a real 'Dr Faustus' around which some of the legend may have been woven. This was a north German magician and alchemist known as Dr. Johann Georg Faust who flourished during the late 15th and early 16th centuries. In Polish folklore there is a tale of another 'Faust' in the guise of one Pan Twardowski who sold his soul to the Devil and raised the spirit of the dead wife of the King. He was carried off by his master, who dropped him on the moon, where he is said to be living to this day! Amusing as such tales may be to the modern cynic and the scoffer, they are not without a hidden meaning and warning for us all.

As we say in our article, unless we wisely restrain the desires of the lower self, it will eventually lead us to the darkness of the lower realms. We are all familiar with the expression "the devil made me do it", but few stop to think what this really means. The only 'devil' that has ever tempted man to sin is the devil that resides within each one of us. That devil is the lower self, whose machinations have never been better described than in the Sublime words of Hermes Trismegistus:

"But first thou must tear to pieces, and break through the garment thou wearest, the web of Ignorance; the foundation of all Mischief; the bond of Corruption; the dark Coverture; the living Death; the sensible Carcass; the Sepulchre, carried about with us; the domestical Thief, which in what he loves us, hates us, envies us.

"Such is the hurtful Apparel, wherewith thou art clothed, which draws and pulls thee downward by its own self, lest looking upward and seeing the beauty of Truth, and the Good that is reposed therein, thou shouldst hate the wickedness of this Garment and understand the traps and ambushes which it had laid for thee.

"Therefore doth it labour to make good those things that seem, and are by the senses, judged and determined; and the things that are truly, it hides, and envelopeth in much matter, filling what it presents unto thee, with hateful pleasure, that thou canst neither hear what thou shouldst hear, nor see what thou shouldst see."

Study these verses well with your full attention if you would halt the downward spiral of scientific materialism. For in them lies your salvation and the salvation of your fellowmen and women from the coming scientific slavery which threatens to dissolve this world and all that dwell upon it in a holocaust of horror such as this sorry globe has not seen for the ages of the ages that have gone by in the long night of man's wilfulness and greed.

We said earlier that many people still make pacts with the devil today. You may think we were exaggerating, or referring to black magic which fascinates so many young people nowadays. We were not. Any man or woman who puts their petty, selfish ambitions and desires before their duty to their fellowmen and women and their love of God is guilty of making such a pact, whether they realise it or not. You do not need to write your name in blood on a parchment or invoke the dark powers to sell your soul to the Devil. You sell a little bit of it every time you commit a selfish act, utter an unkind word, harm another to further your own interests, or turn away from those in genuine need.

That soul is your own Higher Self; the part of you which is from God, and in its highest aspect IS God. You may lose it all at once, like poor Dr Faustus, or Iambus, as you can read in Symphonie Fantastique, or bit by bit, lifetime after lifetime, as the acid of selfishness slowly corrodes its goodness, until it sinks into the darkness of the lower realms, bewailing its lost empire of Light. Judas Iscariot is the type of just such 'lost' souls and he is more common than you may think.

There are millions of Judas' upon this earth, who betray the Christ within them each and every day. Some do it for silver; many more do it for social advancement, for the empty bubble of fame or simply to indulge their sensual desires to the full. Each time they do so, the Christ within them receives another wound, whose scalding tears flood the mind with searing agony and deep regret.

Yea, as Hermes tells us, "the malice of Ignorance surroundeth all the Earth, and corrupteth the Soul, shut up in the Body, not suffering it to arrive at the Havens of Salvation." If this article and our commentary upon it have opened your eyes and moved your heart, then we say exercise your God-given freewill and do your part in stemming the inexorable descent into hell toward which scientific materialism is leading us. Lay hold of the haven of safety which is the One Light of Truth, and make your full course towards it. In this way you will not only save your own soul but that of others too, and so find eternal freedom in heaven, rather than slavery on earth.

But let us not become fanatics on account of our efforts to tame and control our lower selves. The lower self is not evil, though it can become so if it is allowed to indulge its passions and desires without hindrance. Rather, it is a work in progress that is evolving to a higher state and it is our responsibility to aid that development, wisely, calmly and compassionately. When we are no longer in thrall to its selfish and insatiable desires we alter our priorities. Gradually and often imperceptibly at first, we draw nearer to the great Light which is the goal of all true seekers and so reverse the downward direction of our thinking and actions.

We turn our back on the selfishness that once ruled our lives and begin to consider others before we consider ourselves. Wherever we can, and in whatever circumstances we may find ourselves, we try to be of service, modestly and prudently, without ostentation or preaching. And when we fail to live up to the highest and best in us, we dust ourselves down, pick ourselves up and try again. Until with constant practise, good thoughts, pure aspirations and compassionate actions become as natural to us as their opposites were before.

In this and other good ways, we gradually learn to direct all our thinking and action through the Higher Self. We will be better able to express our own unique gifts and abilities for the greatest good. We will be tolerant of differences, but cooperate in harmony with those who are like minded. We will enjoy the good things of this world without becoming attached to them and value them for what they are. We will become a channel for the healing influences of Love, Beauty, Tolerance, and Goodwill, and radiate these qualities to others.

By changing the direction of our lives in this way we will influence the lives of others in many unforeseen directions. We will no longer sit by the wayside of life like the rest of humanity, blaming others for our misfortunes and demanding that 'the government' do something about the sorry mess the world is in. We will have become active and conscious agents of positive change, in full harmony with the Higher Powers, and play our full part in improving worldly conditions for all. We will be upon the path to the Light and our own light will light the way for those of our brothers and sisters who have yet to find the path, but may do so in God's good time through our example.

This is the inner meaning of the Faust legend as you have probably never heard it explained before. Profit then, by the example of that fictitious, but all too common seeker after material knowledge and power, and turning your back on Mephistopheles in whatever shape he should tempt you, take the Royal Road to Freedom that leads to the heart of the Universe where all sorrows cease and all dreams come true.