The Occult Atom

In our afterword to this article we will briefly consider atoms from the standpoint of occult science, so that you may compare occult facts with the theories of material science we have discussed in our article at left. What follows has been adapted from Vision Eight of The Golden Star by J Michaud PhD, which book you can read in its entirety online in HTML format.
The first step in the acts of Creation and evolution is the division of the Vault above from the Abyss below, and the formation of seven circles, each containing a creative God within; the Heavenly Mansions, or Seven Zones. In this way a Kosmic or Solar System is prepared, seemingly complete in itself, arising from a single Supreme and Concealed Logos, and sustained by His Life through the medium of the Seven Creators; one in each Zone.

An example of this is our own Solar System, of which the Sun is the lowest manifestation of the Logos as it acts as the centre of His Kosmos. It is the life-giving, controlling, regulative, coordinative, all-pervading central power. It reflects visibly the highest state of the Universal Presence, the Supreme Deity, and exhibits the first, or lowest, state of the seventh.

All central Suns in every Kosmos are in their physical or objective substance the lowest state of the first Principle of the Breath, or the Word; or may be called the lowest state of the physical body of the Logos. They pour forth the Life of the Lord to His Kosmos, and all the physical forces and energies are but transmutations of the vital fluid of the Supreme Deity passing through, or reflected by, the Sun.

We may term the Sun the Heart of the physical Kosmos, which again is reflected in its spiritual counterpart by the light of the Moon. The Sun is thus the material, male representative and principal part of the physical Kosmos, and the Moon the symbol of the spiritual and female part. The latter is also the dwelling-place of the spirits of men.

For these reasons the Sun has stood as the symbol of the Creator in many of the ancient religions; this referring to the physical creation of the Kosmos in general, and, with man, to the earth and all that is in it, in particular. The Moon, on the other hand, has always been the symbol of the Divine Lady, the Mother of the Gods, the Holy Spouse of God the Supreme.

When the Logos appears, this appearance heralds the birth-hour of a Kosmos, and the One manifested Life of the Kosmos is God, the manifested Lord.

The Auric Envelope which contains the Kosmos within its shell, is exactly similar to an atom, which contains within its glowing outer covering a central sun, around which whirl a number of minute planets called electrons. Both Auric Envelope and atom are ovoid, or egg-shaped in form. For this reason the Kosmos is often referred to as the Auric Egg.

As the huge planets of the Kosmic System within the Auric Envelope are each ruled by a Planetary Logos—God's own Viceroys—so are the minute planets within the atom also ruled by planetary Lords.

Understand well that the terms 'huge' and 'minute' are only concepts of the mortal mind and have an entirely different meaning to God; just as Time and Space cannot be properly understood by the finite understanding of the human ego.

The first requisite in the building of a Kosmos, therefore, is the creation of the Auric Envelope. This is a material projection from God's spiritual mind; an image, a thought-form; obtaining material shape and substance by means of God's Will, which dwells in the Divine Light, from the radiance of which—it being in perpetual motion—comes the Breath, whence emanates the primordial Light in which is manifested Eternal Thought concealed in darkness; and this becomes the WORD of Creation. From this Word, or Mantram, not only the Auric Envelope, but the whole Kosmos comes into manifestation. For within the Envelope the Concealed Logos radiates a Ray which fructifies the germs of Sun and Planets in formation; and the Essence of this Ray expands, giving birth to Planetary Logoi, from whose Minds all things are born.

Before the Planets are made there is Chaos; all the Essences of the future material worlds being in a state of flux; unformed. These are the 'Waters over which brooded the Spirit of God,' and all is darkness, needing the Breath of God to become Light. As the Auric Shell is lit up by that Light, the Word rings forth and comes into manifestation by the act of generation or production. What seems chaos to the human intellect is the eternal Root of Spiritual Wisdom. In this—the Waters of Life—are created, or re-awakened the primordial germs by means of the primordial Light. Thus, the Divine Spirit moves on the Waters of Space within the Auric Envelope and fructifies and infuses the Breath of Life into that germ, which becomes the centre in which the male planetary Logos is created; and from this the first Lord of Beings emerges and becomes the progenitor of mankind.

You will remember from our discussion in our main article at left that each atom has a central sun around which whirl a greater or lesser number of tiny planets, called electrons, so small we cannot see them. The phenomena observed in the study of electrons are similar to the phenomena in the creation of a Kosmos. But Science does not realise that Matter is not an independent reality, and neither is Spirit. Both are symbols or aspects of the Absolute, which constitute the basis of conditioned Being, whether subjective or objective.

This applies also to the Elements mentioned by Plato and Aristotle. They are the same as the incorporeal principles attached to the four great divisions of our Kosmic World; and in the ancient times they used a species of Magism, a psychic paganism, and a deification of potencies: a spiritualisation which placed the believers in a close community with these potencies. So close, indeed, that the Hierarchies of these Potencies, or Forces, have been classified on a graduated scale of seven; from the ponderable to the imponderable. This is a Cosmic graduation in the true sense; from the chemical, or physical, to the spiritual.

Every atom in the Universe has the potentiality of self-consciousness in it, and is a Universe in itself and for itself. It is an atom and an angel. Each atom, and each entity must win for itself the right of becoming divine through self-experience; and Hegel, the Philosopher, sensed this when he said that the Unconscious evolves in the Universe only in the hope of attaining clear self-consciousness.

Being scattered in Space, without order or system, the World-Germs come into frequent collision until their final aggregation, after which they become comets. Then the battles and struggles begin. The older bodies attract the younger, while others repel them. Many perish, devoured by their stronger companions. Those that escape become Worlds. These are the 'battles of the Flames,' the 'wars in heaven,' the 'wars of the Titans,' and the struggles between Osiris and Typhon, of which you can read in the various mythologies.

Science has also come to the conclusion that electricity is a tangible thing, with some of the properties of ordinary matter, and among them the ability to move; and in this manner it is also catching up with the ancient Occult Teachings. It knows that electricity may exist as separate electrons, protons, or positrons, or in collected charges of these entities, and that electric currents, for instance, present a variety of aspects.

It knows of progressive motions of electrons in a conductor, which is called electric conduction, and of the two-way traffic of charged ions, called electrolytic conduction. The current may consist of a flight of electrons or other charged particles through a vacuum, or it may be a bodily movement of an electric charge, like that on one of the carriers of a static machine. It talks of displacement currents which are assumed to take place in a dielectric, or even in a vacuum, which accounts perhaps for the behaviour of electromagnetic fields and radiation; but science has as yet no definite conception of the true nature of electricity, or Fohat in our terms.

The Sun is a huge magnet, and it has a tremendous magnetic field around it, in the same manner as all other heavenly bodies in our Kosmos have such magnetic fields, or the atom and all living and inanimate beings and things possess them. Kepler discovered, over 300 years ago, that the Sun was a magnet, although he had not discovered the laws of attraction and repulsion in the Kosmos, which laws were called 'love' and 'hate' by Empedocles; having the same meaning as attraction and repulsion. These are no 'blind' laws, as Laplace thought; ignoring the presence of creative Forces, endowed with intelligence.

We may liken the Sun to the Kosmic Atom, which becomes seven Atoms on the plane of Matter, and each is transformed into a centre of energy. Each Atom becomes Seven Rays on the plane of Spirit; and the seven creative Forces of Nature, radiating from the Root-Essence, follow.

The Atoms, emanated from the central point, produce within themselves two new centres of energy, which under the potential breath of Fohat, begin their work and multiply other minor centres. These, in turn evolve, form new roots; from men-bearing globes down to genera, species, and the classes of all the Kingdoms.

The formless radiations, existing in the harmony of the Universal Will, and being what we term the collective, or the aggregate, of Kosmic Will on the plane of the subjective Universe, unite together an infinitude of Monads—each the mirror of its own Universe—and thus individualise for the time being an independent Mind, omniscient and universal. By the same process of magnetic aggregation they create for themselves objective, visible bodies, out of the interstellar Atoms.

Thus, to the eye of the Seer, the Higher Planetary Powers appear under two aspects, the subjective—as influences, and the objective—as mystic forms, which become Presences; Spirit and Matter being One! For Spirit is Matter on the seventh Plane; Matter is Spirit at the lowest point of its cyclic activity; and both are Illusion.

It is from the Sea of Fire, which is the Super-Astral Light, the first radiation from the Root, or the undifferentiated Kosmic Substance, that we derive Astral Matter; which is sometimes called the Fiery Serpent. Roughly viewed, the Monads may be divided into three distinct Hosts. The first, counting from the highest Plane are Gods, or Kosmic Spiritual Egos, the Architects of the Universe. The second are the Elementals, or the Monads, who form unconsciously the grand Universal Mirrors of everything connected with their respective Realms.

Lastly come the 'Atoms' and material molecules, which are informed in their turn by their 'perceptive' Monads, just as every cell in a human body is so informed. There are shoals of such informed Atoms, which, in their turn, inform the molecules; an infinitude of Monads, or Elementals proper, and countless Spiritual Forces—Monadless, for they are pure incorporealities, except under certain laws, when they do assume a form—not necessarily human.

Only earth and water can bring forth a living being, for they form the prima materia and the creative female principle on the earth-plane. But they must first be impregnated by the Fiery Principle of the Sun, and the Spirit of the Sun, combined with the elements of matter, are the symbols of physical generation.

Thus, the simple material cell, impregnated by the spirit, will divide itself into two cells, and another being has been born in the mysterious way for which intellectual science cannot account. Within the cell germinates that consciousness which is the earliest manifestation of the causal consciousness of God. Minerals live, suffer from communicable diseases and reproduce their kind. Crystals move and exhibit generative processes similar to those of plants; and they can be poisoned.

And all these beginnings of life occur on planets so infinitely minute that they become as awesome as the largest star in space. And whilst the proud pavane of time glides by, there are born the minute specks that will foregather and combine, and in the blood of animals there swarm multitudes of living entities.

Four-and-a-half millions of tiny red cells, with lots of room to spare are afloat in the fluid of a cubic millimetre of blood! On a square millimetre, a million bacteria, measuring about one micron in diameter, such as for instance staphylococci, can be laid without much overlapping in a single layer of a thousand rows, having a thousand in each row. These make one thousand million cubic microns in a cubic millimetre.

The things that are, exist first in the Spiritual Conception, and fall later on into generation on the material plane. In the Soul of God exists the Soul of the World to come; in the Minds of the Logoi exist the creative and intellectual faculties; in the Astral World is the formative or Astral world or body; from the physical body of the Gods come the reflected bodies of the material planets, things and beings.