Tolkien's legendarium
In our afterword to part two of this investigation we summarise Tolkien's legendarium—the collection of legends and histories he invented—from which The Lord of the Rings evolved and which forms the background to it.

We saw in our previous article and afterword that Tolkien's legendarium consists of the languages, legends and histories which he began inventing many years before The Lord of the Rings was even thought of. We also saw that he divided his history into four parts or Ages, which although they do not correspond to the Rounds or Races of occult science, still reprise many of the same themes.

Tolkien's First Age begins with the Music of the Ainur recounted in The Silmarillion; the divine theme that heralds the manifestation of the material universe as we know and perceive it. This beginning is beautifully expressed in The Golden Star:

"The WORD rings out in all the awful grandeur of the descant melody of Unknown Deity; Mighty Lord, beyond all comprehension, Holy beyond all Holiness, Sacred beyond all Sanctity; the Paraclete; the Highest Point of Blesséd Trinity; beyond the consecrated depths of Wisdom of His Viceroys in the Kosmic Realms themselves.

"Peal after peal, majestic thunder of the Word resounds within these catacombs of gloom. Impelling, awakening, until is felt a heavier tremor running through the seeming emptiness of Night; as if with mighty sweeps of monstrous pinions a million thousand-wingéd Giant Bats soar up from out the threat'ning caverns of the sullen mountain-chains of ebon death that seem to rise up from the deeps of Kosmic emptiness.

"And still the Word rings out; its seven times seven times seven syllables a-chant like tolling bells and Choirs of singing Angels, and throbbing of great drums, and from out the interstellar realms shoots forth a mighty beam of brilliant light, which penetrates the massed fortresses of darkness and of Chaos. Swift and sure it stabs the gloom, like gleam of ent'ring sword in quiv'ring body.

"Within the core of that vast aggregation of thick precosmic density a mighty Fire has been lit, which roars and leaps with Life. The blinding flames rise up and swirl and dance with joy and gladness, whilst clouds of Kosmic Dust descend into the flames from all directions, and ever higher leap the roaring tongues of fire, and vaster becomes the conflagration until a central Sun is formed within the Kosmic Deep, a glowing ball of incandescence, slowly turning round upon itself and lighting up the vast and hollow caves within the starry fields, till, one by one they disappear from sight, and Night gives way to glorious Light, which streams from that vast Lamp of God in answer to the ringing Word."

Did Tolkien read The Golden Star, or even know of it? We cannot say, though it is a possibility that cannot be entirely ruled out for it caused quite a stir among occultists on its publication in 1946 and may well have been known to Owen Barfield whose considerable influence upon Tolkien's work we discuss in the afterword to the final part of this investigation.

After the Ainur arise the Valar or lesser gods—seven in number—whose task it is to sing the Song Celestial, Eru, the One, who is called Ilúvatar has propounded to them. In his letters Tolkien describes them as "angelic powers, whose function is to exercise delegated authority in their spheres (of rule and government, not creation, making or re-making). They are 'divine', that is, were originally 'outside' and existed 'before' the making of the world. Their power and wisdom is derived from their Knowledge of the cosmogonical drama."

In his remarks in parenthesis Tolkien departs from the true facts of occult science, most probably because he did not wish to contradict the teaching of the Catholic Church which does not acknowledge any Creator or creators other than the 'one god' of its dogmatic creed. Occult Science on the contrary teaches that there are rank upon rank of Creators, each responsible for specific tasks within the grand scheme of Creation as we may read in Volume 1 of The Secret Doctrine, Stanza II, in which the beginning of the manifested universe (Tolkien's 'World') is described. We have translated the Sanskrit terms used by H. P. Blavatsky into their closest English equivalents to make this passage more comprehensible to readers unfamiliar with Eastern occultism:

"Where were the Builders, the luminous Sons of Manvantaric Dawn? In the unknown Darkness in their Divine vehicles. The producers of form from no-form, the Root of the World—the Mother of all the Gods and the Prima Materia which is the noumenon of both Spirit and Matter, rested in the bliss of Non-Being." In a larger and deeper sense, we are all 'outside' and existed 'before' the making of the world, or rather its manifestation, as you can read in The Golden Star. But this is by the way.

But Tolkien did get one thing right when he wrote: "The Knowledge of the Creation Drama was incomplete: incomplete in each individual 'god', and incomplete if all the knowledge of the pantheon were pooled. For (partly to redress the evil of the rebel Melkor, partly for the completion of all in an ultimate finesse of detail) the Creator had not revealed all." This echoes the words of the French philosopher Pascal, who wrote: "Nature has perfections, in order to show that she is the image of God: and defects, in order to show that she is only his image."

These 'defects' are the work of the Valar, or inferior spirits, who carry out the actual task of creation. Lacking the wisdom of Eru, or even His immediate emanations, the Ainur, they make mistakes. In Tolkien's cosmogony, these gods are seven in number, just as they are in the occult scientific teachings expounded in The Secret Doctrine. In it we may read that our Earth was fashioned by the lower, or terrestrial spirits, those Valar or lesser gods who in Tolkien's legendarium "went down into the World", meaning they who descended into matter.

This same event is borne out by all the ancient cosmogonies: that of the Hindus, the Chinese, the Egyptians, and the Jews, in each of which we find a god who rebels against the commands of the 'One'. In Tolkien's mythos this is Melkor, who fell from glory when he disrupted the Music of the Ainur and defied the will of Eru. His theft of the jewels—the Silmarils—which contained the Light of Valinor—the 'Blessed' land, and his wars against Elves and Men take up much of the history of the First Age. Eventually, he is bound in chains by the Valar and thrown into the Void as we learnt in part one of this investigation.

All this finds its counterpart in the eschatologies of many peoples and nations, notably in Hinduism, where the Hindu Lucifer—the Mahasura—is said to have become envious of the Creator's resplendent light, and, as the head of the inferior spirits, rebelled against Brahma; for which Siva hurled him down to Patala. In Tolkien's legendarium Melkor has a servant—Sauron—who survives the doom of his master, "a thing lusting for Complete Power" as Tolkien describes him, "consumed ever more fiercely with hate and only less evil than his master in that for long he served another and not himself."

Tolkien's legendarium then moves into his Second Age and the history of the Elves which is recounted in The Silmarillion proper. As this Age draws to its close, a great Kingdom and evil theocracy (for Sauron is also the god of his slaves) arises in Middle-earth in the isle of Númenór which, as we saw in part one, closely parallels the real history of Atlantis and the fate of its inhabitants, who beginning as mortal 'gods' became 'black with sin' and were destroyed when their island continent was torn apart by volcanic eruptions and engulfed by the sea. Tolkien's description of the downfall of Númenór in one of his letters is virtually identical with the account given by H. P. Blavatsky in Volume II of The Secret Doctrine:

"A new religion, and worship of the Dark, with its temple under Sauron arises. The Faithful are persecuted and sacrificed. The Númenóreans carry their evil to Middle-earth and there become cruel and wicked lords of necromancy, slaying and tormenting men; and the old legends are overlaid with dark tales of horror. This does not happen, however, in the North West; for thither, because of the Elves, only the Faithful who remain Elf-friends will come. The chief haven of the good Númenóreans is near the mouth of the great river Anduin. Thence the still beneficent influence of Númenór spreads up the River and along the coasts as far north as the realm of Gilgalad, as a Common Speech grows up."

Here we have a clear distinction between the 'good' and 'bad' Atlanteans; the former led by the 'Sons of Light' (Tolkien's Elves) and the latter corrupted by the 'Sons of Darkness' (Sauron and his followers). Note too, that the 'good' Númenóreans spread their beneficent wisdom, just laws and technology far and wide, just as the Atlanteans did, forming colonies in Spain, Egypt and even the British Isles as we discussed in our article on the Egyptian colonists in England.

In his letters, Tolkien described his 'Second Age' as a 'twilight' during which three main themes play out. These are the fate of the Elves that lingered in Middle-earth; the rise of a new Dark Lord in the form of Sauron and his corrupting influence on the men of Númenór—Tolkien's Atlanteans; and the making of the Rings of Power and the downfall of Númenór. According to occult science Atlantis was destroyed during our present fourth 'Round' and the Atlanteans were the fourth of seven great Root Races, of which our present races and nations are the fifth. So although there is a correspondence of events between Tolkien's mythos and occult history, there is no chronological correspondence in time.

Tolkien's Second Age ends with the Last Alliance (of Elves and Men), and the overthrow of Sauron and destruction of the second visible incarnation of evil—Melkor, you will recall, being the first. The Great Ring is cut from Sauron's hand by Isildur, a 'good' Númenórean, and with it Sauron's power leaves him and his spirit flees into the shadows. But the evil he engendered lives on, for Isildur claims the Ring as his own, and refusing to cast it into the Fire where it was made, marches away, but is drowned and the Ring lost, passing out of all knowledge. But—as Tolkien tells us—"it is not unmade, and the Dark Tower built with its aid still stands, empty but not destroyed."

The Third Age is concerned mainly with the One Ring whose symbolism we discussed in our article at left. The Dark Lord is no longer on his throne, but his monsters are not wholly destroyed, and his dreadful servants—the nine Ring-wraiths, the slaves of the Ring—endure as shadows among the shadows. Mordor is empty and the Dark Tower void, and a watch is kept upon the borders of the evil land.

It is in the middle of this Age that the Hobbits appear. Tolkien tells us that: "their origin is unknown (even to themselves) for they escaped the notice of the great, or the civilised peoples with records, and kept none themselves, save vague oral traditions." We learn that they had migrated, wandering westward, coming in the end to the land of the 'Shire'. Unlike the Elves, Hobbits possess no superhuman powers, though they are closely in touch with nature and all growing things, and abnormally for human-like beings, free from ambition or greed of wealth. We are told that their diminutive stature is intended to exhibit the simplicity of plain, unimaginative, rustic folk, but mostly to show the amazing and unexpected heroism and courage of ordinary men 'at a pinch'.

These virtues find their quintessence and full expression in Frodo, who as we shall see in the final part of this investigation, astonishes both Elves and Wizards by the qualities he displays in the furtherance of the perilous quest to destroy the One Ring of Power which is the central theme of the story.

Nowhere in The Lord of the Rings is the origin, nature or purposes of Tolkien's mysterious 'Wizards' made fully explicit. We are told that he chose the name to distinguish these wise sages from sorcerers or magicians, which had and have an unsavoury reputation in the minds of many readers. Tolkien tells us in one of his letters that his Wizards were the near equivalent of guardian Angels whose work was primarily to encourage the enemies of evil to use their own wits and valour to unite and endure against the powers of darkness.

The Wizard, Gandalf, whom we shall discuss in part three, was especially charged to watch over the affairs of Men and Hobbits. Fuller and further discussion of Tolkien's Wizards can be found in The Silmarillion and The Complete History of Middle-earth where they are called the Istari, a class of spiritual beings sent to Middle-earth by the Valar in human form as Messengers to help in the struggle against Sauron.