Tolkien and the Occult
In our afterword to the final part of this investigation we consider to what extent Tolkien was involved with Occultism and the influence this had on the themes within The Lord of the Rings and the mythos which underpinned it.

Some of our readers will have heard of the 'Inklings'—a loose group of like-minded friends who gathered around Tolkien during the 1930's and 40's (see further reading list below). Many were academics at Oxford University, others accomplished writers such as C. S. Lewis, dramatists like Nevill Coghill, and two, Charles Williams and Owen Barfield, who were steeped in mysticism and the occult. It is these two friends of Tolkien that most interest us, as both had a significant, if subtle influence on the occult themes within The Lord of the Rings and the mythology and legendarium which underpin it.

charles williams
Charles Williams (1886-1945)

Charles Williams was by far the strangest of this very unconventional group of friends. He was an accomplished poet, novelist, literary critic, editor, lecturer, biographer, Anglican Christian, but above all, a practising and enthusiastic occultist. No wonder Tolkien, who remained a staunch—if at times unorthodox—catholic all his life, was irritated, perplexed, repelled and fatally fascinated by Williams in equal measure!

Tolkien's reaction was not untypical of the other Inklings, who, with the exception of C. S. Lewis, regarded Williams as a cross between an amiable eccentric and a witch-doctor. They were especially wary of his involvement with the occult, which even in the 1930's had a most unsavoury reputation, thanks in large part to the scandalous activities of a self-proclaimed 'Adept' and his famous dictum of 'do what thou wilt,' which in his case meant a degree of hedonism and excess that makes the antics of our modern celebrities seem very tame in comparison.

Williams was fascinated by the occult from an early age and by the time he was in his twenties had joined at least one Rosicrucian society, among them the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia (SRIA). It was two leading lights within the SRIA, the London Coroner, William Wynn Westcott and the Masonic scholar the Rev. A. F. A. Woodford (then Supreme Magus of the SRIA), who together with Samuel Liddell Mathers, founded the famous Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn between 1888 and 1892.

But within a few short years the order was riven by various feuds and disintegrated in acrimonious strife. By the time Williams encountered it in September 1917 at the age of 30, it had broken up into several splinter groups, one of which was a nominally 'Christian' offshoot called The Fellowship of the Rosy Cross (FRC) founded by the Anglo-American poet, A. E. Waite in 1915. Waite had himself joined the Golden Dawn in 1891 and the SRIA in 1902, and was in correspondence with Williams for many years before he introduced the enthusiastic young occultist into his own organisation.

We do not know what grade Williams reached in the FRC but it is likely that by the time he left it in 1938 or 1939, he would worked his way through the whole of the curriculum which was, and for all we know may still be (for this order still exists today), a mixture of the rituals and grade structure of the Golden Dawn, Rosicrucianism, Qabbalah and Christian mysticism. Williams was strongly influenced by the Church of England, and belonged to the Anglican Communion. He was a member of St. Silas' church, where he attended with his wife and child. It was this Anglican influence together with his long-standing interest in occultism which inspired his major writings.

It was through one of those odd coincidences which will be familiar to many of our readers that Williams first made contact with the Inklings. Around the time he left the FRC in 1938, Williams wrote to C. S. Lewis about a work Lewis had submitted to the press. Lewis had just read one of Williams' novels, and had also written to him about it. Their letters crossed in the post. The result was a profound friendship which lasted until Williams' death, a friendship which introduced Williams to the Inklings, and another occultist, Owen Barfield, whom we shall discuss later.

It was undoubtedly Williams' predominantly Christian outlook that appealed strongly to Tolkien, though as we said earlier, this was tinged with a good deal of cordial suspicion and perplexity on Tolkien's part, who could not reconcile Williams' visionary Christianity with the mystic's equally enthusiastic interest in occultism. This is a dilemma that will be familiar to many readers who were brought up in the Christian faith and have been taught that the 'occult' is evil. Some never surmount this obstacle to studying occult science, and from what we know of Tolkien's own beliefs, it seems he never took up the study either, which accounts for his rather stormy and erratic relationship with Williams.

Although we have called him a mystic, Charles Williams saw himself as too cynical and pragmatic for such a label. He considered himself primarily a poet even though he is best known for his eight supernatural 'thrillers', as well as his detailed non-fiction works on the history of the Church. Many of these novels explore the same themes that crop up in The Lord of the Rings. In his first novel, Shadows of Ecstasy, published in 1933, a charismatic occult 'adept', Nigel Considine, discovers the secret of immortality and after living in Africa for several centuries, leads hordes of African warriors to invade England!

Whilst Considine is no Sauron or even Saruman, there are parallels between Williams' occult thriller and the corrupting usages of power in The Lord of the Rings. These parallels are even closer in Williams' earlier novel, War in Heaven (1930), in which several (mostly very unpleasant) protagonists compete for the possession of the cup used at the Last Supper—the Holy Grail—or as Williams spells it, the 'Holy Graal', resulting in a war of Good and Evil. If we substitute the One Ring for Williams' 'Graal', the similarities between his thriller and The Lord of the Rings are striking.

The novel which most impressed Tolkien and C. S. Lewis was The Place of the Lion, published in 1931. In it, a series of supernatural animals, among them a Lion, a Serpent, a Unicorn, a Lamb, an Eagle, a Butterfly, a Horse, a Lamb and a Phoenix, roam about the English countryside, devouring smaller animals of their own kinds. It is a lively, compelling adventure story, as one hero dares to face up to the creatures and command them to go back to their own place and leave the earth alone! These zootypes, as our more discerning readers will have guessed, are thinly disguised Platonic archetypes and occult emblems. In Williams' eschatology, each animal corresponds to a different order of angels, and each also symbolises some spiritual or moral quality or virtue.

Perhaps the closest Williams gets to the themes in The Lord of the Rings is in his novel Many Dimensions, published in 1931. The book opens with three men examining a mysterious object: "It was a circlet of old, tarnished and twisted gold, in the centre of which was set a cubical stone measuring about half an inch every way, and having apparently engraved on it certain Hebrew letters." This stone could transport the possessor to any spot on earth, or into the past or future. What is interesting from our point of view is that the weak and the wicked are tempted by the power of the stone to do things that bring about their own destruction. This is exactly what happens to Gollum in The Lord of the Rings.

Coincidence? We would not like to say, but there is no question that many of the themes which Williams explores in his occult novels and sometimes the ways in which he handles them, correspond to the same or similar themes in Tolkien's epic. In Williams' fiction otherworldly events unfold against a contemporary and very ordinary backdrop, just as they do in the extraordinary adventures of four very ordinary Hobbits in The Lord of the Rings. With both authors, the ordinary becomes extraordinary, and nothing is quite what it seems to be. So much for the literary connections between Williams and Tolkien, what of the man himself and his ideas?

Williams formulated several interesting concepts which appear to have influenced Tolkien's mythos, such as the 'Web of Exchange', or the inextricable interconnectedness of all persons in Creation and its attendant responsibility. Not that there is nothing new in this idea, for the evolution of all things from One Thing and their dependence upon a First Cause was a fundamental tenet of occult science thousands of years before Plotinus espoused his ideas of 'Henosis' or Oneness. Another of Williams' ideas that is reflected in The Lord of the Rings is the literal bearing of one another's burdens which he called the 'Doctrine of Substituted Love'. In The Lord of the Rings, this is best exemplified in Sam, whose deep and abiding love for Frodo makes him accompany him in his perilous quest and even leads him to take up the burden of the One Ring for a time.

Williams attracted droves of young women to his lectures, but was said by C. S. Lewis to have been 'decorous' with them. However, some biographers have suggested that Williams had a penchant for ritual sado-masochism which he liked to indulge with his female acolytes. Whatever truth there may be in such assertions, they do not concern us, except to show that no man is without his flaws. What we can say is that during the seven years Tolkien knew him from 1938 until his death in 1945, the two had many conversations together, either alone, or in company with the other Inklings.

During the period between 1939 until his death in 1945, Williams was acknowledged as the spiritual and intellectual leader of this most unusual and productive circle over whose informal meetings he presided with Jack Lewis as unofficial 'Chairman', whilst Warren Hamilton (W. H.) Lewis (C. S. Lewis' older brother, known to his friends as 'Warnie' Lewis) fulfilled the role of 'Secretary'.

It has been suggested that the single most important inspiration for Tolkien's later success as a writer of what is now called 'fantasy fiction' but could more accurately be described as 'mythic romance', was Williams' The Place of the Lion mentioned earlier. This is possible, for as we have seen, many of the themes Williams wove into his novels re-appear in The Lord of the Rings, as well as in those of Tolkien's writings which remained unfinished and unpublished at his death such as the The Book of Lost Tales and Notion Club Papers. But there was another catalyst, who, although he met Tolkien on comparatively few occasions and was only an intermittent and irregular participant in the meetings of the Inklings, influenced the formulation and development of Tolkien's mythos and legendarium just as profoundly as Charles Williams, if not more so.

owen barfield
Owen Barfield (1898-1997)

That catalyst was Arthur Owen Barfield, whose influence on Tolkien's work is all the more remarkable for its quiet, unobtrusive, yet profoundly transforming effect. Although six years younger than Tolkien, Barfield outlived him by 24 years, passing away at the ripe old age of 99 in 1997. Born in London in 1898, Barfield encountered the teachings of Rudolf Steiner in his twenties, and joined Steiner's Anthroposophical Society in 1924. In a letter written to Barfield in 1928, Lewis wrote: "You might like to know that when Tolkien dined with me the other night he said, apropos of something quite different, that your conception of the ancient semantic unity had modified his whole outlook."

Barfield wrote two non-fiction books on the study and meaning of language, History in English Words (1926) and Poetic Diction (1928), both of which Tolkien read and admired. History in English Words is one of the relatively few attempts to investigate the history of peoples as revealed through language. In Poetic Diction, Barfield wrote: "language has preserved for us the inner, living history of man's soul. It reveals the evolution of consciousness."

It is the evolution of consciousness and the redemptive power of love which above all else, characterise Barfield's writing. Tolkien took a keen interest in the theories Barfield espoused in Poetic Diction and once told C. S. Lewis that Barfield's ideas had permanently altered how he taught the history of language. Many of these ideas were taken up by Tolkien in the creation of his mythos and legendarium.

In his essay on fairy stories Tolkien remarks that "antiquity has an appeal in itself," and proceeded to illustrate and develop this idea in The Lord of the Rings. As we saw in the first two parts of this investigation, Tolkien constructed his stories in order to provide a historical context for the languages that he had invented, whereas Barfield uncovered the history of peoples through his more traditional etymological study of languages. In this way each unconsciously mirrored the work of the other.

Barfield's concept of a fully conscious, participative union with Nature (which comes close to the occult scientific doctrine of 'Cosmic Consciousness'—described and discussed in Vision 9 of The Golden Star)— may well have influenced Tolkien's development of Tom Bombadil as well as the natural oneness of the Elves. It was Barfield more than anyone else who inspired and encouraged Tolkien to recognise that myth and allegory have always played a central role in the metaphysical truths preserved in the language and literature of all times and peoples.

If you have followed our investigation from the beginning you can be in little doubt that Tolkien adapted many occult scientific teachings in the creation of his mythical world and the cosmogony that underpins it. Gandalf and Saruman are both occult adepts, the one of white magic and the other of black. Tolkien's Elves exhibit many of the qualities and perform many of the functions of the Devas and Nature Spirits that preside over the Nature's elemental kingdoms and guide their evolution.

Barfield's books are steeped in occultism, though it must be said, overlaid with a heavy dose of Christian mysticism which is not improved by his life-long adherence to the rather odd notions of Rudolf Steiner. Whilst this is not the time or place to discuss this German occultist and founder of Anthroposophy, there is no getting away from the fact that his so-called 'teachings' were largely filched from Theosophy. In superimposing his own personal and often fanciful interpretations on the esoteric teachings of H. P. Blavatsky, he compounded the damage done to Theosophy by both Annie Besant and C. W. Leadbeater after the death of the founder, whilst contributing nothing that had not been said better by Blavatsky herself.

Despite his membership of the Anglican Communion Barfield continued to believe in reincarnation, and it is likely that what he had learned of this doctrine through his occult studies was responsible for Tolkien's adaptation of it in his concept of the immortality of his Elves we discussed in our article at left. Following the publication of his early works, Barfield was forced by personal circumstances to spend several decades as a practising lawyer. Never completely ceasing his scholarly pursuits, he resumed them with extraordinary fruitfulness after his retirement in the 1960s.

Tolkien reintroduced heroic literature to the modern world, as his legion of imitators (good, bad and indifferent) demonstrates. Hooded black riders, dark lords in dark towers, cheerful, rustic heroes of small stature, mysterious elves who live in forests—these things have passed into the consciousness of the modern world.

To some degree Tolkien changed how we see the world, and by doing so changed the world. Insofar as Charles Williams and Owen Barfield helped to shape Tolkien's mythos and legendarium, this may be their most lasting legacy, for few now read their books, while millions read The Lord of the Rings.

If this three-part investigation inspires you to join these appreciative readers, or, if you read the book years ago, encourages you to revisit it with a deeper understanding of its esoteric themes, the considerable labour and research entailed in writing it will be amply repaid.