Tolkien's mythos
In our afterword we consider the complex mythology which underpins The Lord of the Rings and the sources of it.

As we said in our introduction, The Lord of the Rings is the outgrowth from, and partial exposition of, a very much larger, wider and deeper underlying mythos which Tolkien left uncompleted at his death in 1973. Its origins stretch back more than sixty years to the author's youth when he first became interested in languages and began inventing his own. What we know of it comes mainly from The Silmarillion, published posthumously by his son, Christopher Tolkien in 1977, as well as from Tolkien's letters and copious writings (see further reading list below).

In a letter written in 1951 he said: "I do not remember a time when I was not building it (his mythos and legendarium). Many children make up imaginary languages. I have been at it ever since I could write. But I never stopped, and of course, as a professional philologist, I changed in taste, improved in theory, and probably in craft. Behind my stories is a nexus of languages. But an equally basic passion of mine was for myth and for fairy-tale, and above all for heroic legend on the brink of fairy-tale and history. Also, I was from an early age grieved by the poverty of my own beloved country: it had no stories of its own (bound up with its tongue and soil), not of the quality that I sought, and found (as an ingredient) in legends of other lands. There was Greek, there was Celtic, and Romance, Germanic, Scandinavian, and Finnish (which greatly affected me); but nothing English, save impoverished chap-book stuff. Of course there was and is all the Arthurian world, but powerful as it is, it is imperfectly naturalized, associated with the soil of Britain but not with English; and it does not replace what I felt to be missing." Here, from the author's own lips, we have the origins of his mythos and legendarium, and the reasons for them, which led to the creation of The Lord of the Rings.

It is for these reasons that The Silmarillion is the central source of Tolkien's imaginative writing, for in it we find the mythology, legends, history and cosmogony which run like a golden thread through The Lord of the Rings, and without which many of the themes in it cannot be understood. The published editions of The Silmarillion include several shorter works which greatly influenced both The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. These are the Ainulindalë or Music of the Ainur—a creation myth—and the Valaquenta, in which the nature and powers of each of the gods in Tolkien's mythos is described. We shall return to the Ainulindalë later when we discuss the many close correspondences between Tolkien's cosmogony and the occult scientific teachings to be found in such books as The Secret Doctrine.

silmarillion
The Silmarillion also contains the Akallabêth which recounts the downfall of the great island civilisation of Númenór—Tolkien's re-working of the Atlantis myth—which, of course, is no myth at all, but historical fact, as you may read in our article about the lost continent. In this connection it is noteworthy that ever since his childhood Tolkien was troubled by vivid and terrifying dreams of the destruction of Atlantis, though perhaps 'memories' would be a better word to describe these recurring visions. In a letter written to the poet W. H. Auden in 1955, Tolkien wrote: "I have what some might call an Atlantis complex. I mean the terrible recurrent dream (beginning with memory) of the Great Wave, towering up, and coming in ineluctably over the trees and green fields. I don't think I have had it since I wrote the 'Downfall of Númenór."

In another letter written to a fan in 1964 Tolkien wrote: "This legend or myth or dim memory of some ancient history has always troubled me. In sleep I had the dreadful dream of the ineluctable Wave, either coming out of the quiet sea, or coming in towering over the green inlands. It still occurs occasionally, though now exorcized by writing about it. It always ends by surrender, and I awake gasping out of deep water. I used to draw it or write bad poems about it."

In The Notion Club Papers, an abandoned novel written during 1945 and published posthumously in Sauron Defeated in The Complete History of Middle-earth, Tolkien wrote: "Ah! Look! There is a chasm in the midst of the Great Seas and the waters rush down into it in great confusion. The ships of the Númenóreans are drowned in the abyss. They are lost for ever. See now the eagles of the Lords overshadow Númenór. The mountain goes up to heaven in flame and vapour; the hills totter, slide, and crumble: the land founders. The glory has gone down into the deep waters. Dark ships, dark ships flying into darkness! The eagles pursue them. Wind drives them, waves like hills moving. All has passed away. Light has departed!"

This account and the two preceding letters agree with the description of the destruction of Atlantis preserved in the Stanzas of Dzyan, translated by H. P. Blavatsky in The Secret Doctrine, portions of which we included in our article about Atlantis. It is interesting that Tolkien adds the words 'beginning with memory' in parenthesis in the first letter quoted above in which he also reveals that one of his four children had the same dreams. This may have been his literary executor, Christopher Tolkien, but this is guesswork on our part, though not without some foundation, for we are often reincarnated with the same individuals we knew in previous lives.

As we said in our article at left, Tolkien was one of those rare individuals with a gift for far-seeing vision who could contact the memories of the distant past and bring them back to vivid life. The writer Rider Haggard possessed a similar gift which we allude to in our reviews of some of his historical novels, which are no more fiction than Tolkien's 'invention' of Númenór. Tolkien's account of the fall of Atlantis as he envisaged it is in sharp contrast to the many books written by psychics about their visions of the lost continent and its peoples, which owe more to fantasy than fact and are often tinged with their own preconceptions. But read the Akallabêth for yourself, as well as the rest of The Silmarillion, and be amazed at what they contain, for we have neither the time nor space to discuss these books in detail here.

We have now seen that Tolkien's mythos and legendarium had many sources, and that both share much in common with such epics as the Ramayana and Mahabharata of India, the Kalevala of Finland, Norse mythology and, as we shall see in part two of this investigation, the doctrine and cosmogony of Occult Science. The primary theme that runs through The Lord of the Rings is the battle of opposing forces, of light and darkness, good and evil, beauty and ugliness, horror and joy, Divine magic and devilish sorcery, spirituality and mechanistic materialism.

As we said earlier, if we wish to understand Tolkien's cosmogony we must consult the Ainulindalë which forms the first part of The Silmarillion. In it we may read: "There was Eru, the One, who in Arda is called Ilúvatar; and he made first the Ainur, the Holy Ones, that were the offspring of his thought, and they were with him before aught else was made. And he spoke to them, propounding to them themes of music; and they sang before him, and he was glad." This parallels the Bible in which we find: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God (John 1:1). 'Word' has many meanings, one of which is sound or music, for both are vibration, and it is through vibration plus Light that the whole manifested Universe has arisen. You can read more about sound and colour in our investigation of the Magic of Music.

Further on in the book Ilúvatar tells the Ainur: "I will send forth into the Void the Flame Imperishable, and it shall be at the heart of the World, and the World shall Be; and those of you that will may go down into it." The Ainur who descended into the manifested worlds were named the 'Valar'—the Powers of the World. That 'flame' is none another than the Fire of creation, or more properly manifestation, which as H. P. Blavatsky tells us in The Secret Doctrine "is the beginning and end of every material and spiritual thing." In Vision 8 of The Golden Star this fire is described as follows:

"Within the core of that vast aggregation of thick precosmic density a mighty Fire has been lit, which roars and leaps with Life. The blinding flames rise up and swirl and dance with joy and gladness, whilst clouds of Kosmic Dust descend into the flames from all directions, and ever higher leap the roaring tongues of fire, and vaster becomes the conflagration until a central Sun is formed within the Kosmic Deep, a glowing ball of incandescence, slowly turning round upon itself and lighting up the vast and hollow caves within the starry fields, till, one by one they disappear from sight, and Night gives way to glorious Light, which streams from that vast Lamp of God in answer to the ringing Word."

So we see that, in his mythos Tolkien faithfully reproduces the drama of manifestation just as it is set forth in the occult scientific teachings.

There were 14 Valar in Tolkien's mythos, seven male spirits and seven female, corresponding to the seven spirits before the throne of God mentioned in Revelation. These are the seven planetary spirits discussed in The Secret Doctrine, and it is they, not the One, who are responsible for fashioning the material and spiritual realms, of which there are also seven as we may also read in Vision 8 of The Golden Star: "These Seven Beings are self-born from the inherent power in the matrix of Mother-substance, and the energy from which they spring into conscious existence is the Breath of Absoluteness. This spontaneous coming into conscious existence proceeds from the One manifested Life—which in itself is a reflection from the Absolute—and the One manifested Life is the Supreme Logos Himself."

This scheme of manifestation is borne out by all the ancient Cosmogonies: that of Chaldea, of India, of ancient Egypt, and even in the Bible, where the Elohim are these seven spirits. The mightiest of these spirits in Tolkien's mythos is Melkor, the 'fallen' spirit who attempts to weave his own music into the Divine Theme of Ilúvatar and so becomes the enemy of the other 'gods' and the instigator of the battle between Good and Evil which is played out in The Lord of the Rings. "And there was strife between Melkor and the other Valar. . ." as Tolkien tells us. This strife is described in the Finnish Kalevala, from which Tolkien drew many of his ideas and is echoed in the 'wars in Heaven' we read about in the Mahabharata and Ramayana of India, as well as many other epics of the long ago.

So Tolkien's Valar, in order to fully manifest their vision, descend from the heavens and dwell upon the Earth, sometimes as beings of light, sometimes in material bodies. This also finds its correspondence in the Bible when ". . .the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown" (Genesis 6:4).

In Tolkien's rendering of the Ancient Wisdom set forth in the Valaquenta, the 'gods' descend into incarnation: "Then those of the Ainur who desired it arose and entered into the World at the beginning of Time; and it was their task to achieve it, and by their labours to fulfil the vision which they had seen. Long they laboured in the regions of Eä, which are vast beyond the thought of Elves and Men, until in the time appointed was made Arda, the Kingdom of Earth. Then they put on the raiment of Earth and descended into it, and dwelt therein." With very minor emendations this is in complete accord with the doctrine of occult science, and spells out in a few lines the entire scheme of manifestation and evolution.

The Valar then prepare the Earth for the coming of God's Children, the Elves known as the 'First-born' and Men, known as the 'Followers'. But just as in the Bible a serpent comes along to spoil it all! In Tolkien's mythos this is Melkor whom we referred to earlier, later called Morgoth in the speech of the Elves. Tolkien describes the 'fall' of Melkor in language which is not dissimilar to Milton's great metaphysical epic, Paradise Lost:

"From splendour he fell through arrogance to contempt for all things save himself, a spirit wasteful and pitiless. Understanding he turned to subtlety in perverting to his own will all that he would use, until he became a liar without shame. He began with the desire of the Light, but when he could not possess it for himself alone, he descended through fire and wrath into a great burning, down into Darkness. And darkness he used most in his evil works upon Arda (Earth) and filled it with fear for all living things."

All this constitutes the first of Tolkien's 'Four Ages' as he conceived them. Whilst they bear some comparison with the seven 'Rounds', 'Globes', 'Chains' and 'Races' of occult science as set forth in The Secret Doctrine, there are no direct correspondences between the two schemes. Tolkien's First Age ends with the Enemy (Melkor/Morgoth) being cast "out of the World into the Void, never to reappear there in incarnate form again." If we equate Melkor with the 'Old Serpent' of Revelation, this event takes place at the end of a manvantara or period of manifestation, so there is no apparent correspondence between the two accounts.

Interested readers are referred to The Secret Doctrine for more information about 'Rounds' and 'Races', which is too vast a subject to go into in a short article like this. We discuss Tolkien's Four Ages in the afterword to part two of this investigation in which we summarise his legendarium—the collection of legends and histories he invented—out of which The Lord of the Rings evolved—which form the background to the story.

You may be asking yourself at this point how on earth did Tolkien know all this? The short answer is inspiration, deduction and intuition, for as we will discuss in our afterword to the final part of this investigation, there is no evidence that he ever had any formal occult training though he was certainly influenced by occult teachings, principally through his friendship with Charles Williams and Owen Barfield. Here we must end our brief glimpse into Tolkien's mythos, but we hope that it has given you a deeper insight into The Lord of the Rings and encouraged you to explore the rich symbolism which it contains.