Underneath the Mistletoe

Unwrapping the origins of Christmas.
In sober contrast to my rather silly story I thought it might be interesting to briefly explore the origins of some well-known Christmas customs to see what esoteric truths they may contain.

Mistletoe, as readers of this website's article on the Mysteries of the Druids will know, was revered for its sacred associations long before Christianity was established in Britain. The custom of kissing under mistletoe may also have come from the Druids. In those ancient times enemies would meet under the mistletoe in the sacred groves of the Druids and lay down their arms and observe a truce until the next day. This later developed into the custom of hanging mistletoe from the ceiling and exchanging kisses under it as a sign of friendship and goodwill. But why was mistletoe chosen for this purpose? The nature of this unusual plant may furnish the clue.

Mistletoe is an aerial parasite that has no roots of its own and lives off the tree that it attaches itself to, primarily oak trees. Without the tree it would die. Here we have an allegory of the lower self which 'clings' to its better half so long as both are united in the body. We might also regard mistletoe as the Higher Self which truly "dies" when it enters into corporeal life, as Plato tells us in his Phaedo. It is well-known that the leaves and berries of mistletoe are poisonous. Much the same applies to the Higher Self if it gravitates toward the lower self with all its poisonous habits and desires. Unless it reaches out to the true Soul (the Oak), discussed by the authors of this website in their article of the same name, it is doomed to perish in the end.

The fact that the Druids were able to change—or we might even say transmute—poison into an elixir which restored both body and mind is very suggestive of the alchemical transformation of lead into gold, both literally and figuratively. We may then say that mistletoe is an emblem of the transformative powers of Life, Light and Love to conquer death, darkness and hatred.

So much for mistletoe, what about holly? We know from ancient authors that holly was sacred to the planet Saturn and was used during the Roman festival of Saturnalia that took place during December each year to crown the drunken party-goers and deck the walls of their homes. Sound familiar? The association of holly with Saturn—the cruel taskmaster of the Zodiac, as astrologers have called it—may explain why it was used to frighten off witches and protect the home from evil. In former times in England it was believed that sprigs of holly hung around a young girl's bed on Christmas Eve would keep away evil spirits. Perhaps those readers who have teenage daughters (or sons!) might like to try this to see if it stops their kids binge drinking over the Christmas holidays!

The Church quickly appropriated holly leaves as emblematic of Jesus' crown of thorns and its red berries as the blood shed during his crucifixion. But this symbolism never really caught on among the laity, who (probably wisely) preferred the Roman association with fun, laughter and frivolity which it has to this day. But for the Druids holly symbolised the red fire of the Sun-God which would purify the soul of man and protect it from evil. We may also say that the prickly leaves are emblematical of the hard lessons of earthly life and the berries the wisdom we carry away with us after death. In medical herbalism holly berries are employed as an emetic and purgative, which is not such a bad description of the 'purging' effect life's tests and trials have upon us!

Although our familiar Christmas 'tree' dates back no further than the early 19th century when the long-established German custom of decorating a tree on 24th December was introduced into England by Queen Victoria, the use of evergreen trees, wreaths and garlands to symbolise eternal life goes back many thousands of years to ancient Egypt. The custom may even be millions of years old, for Egypt was founded by Atlantean colonists as many of you will know. In fact, trees, especially evergreen trees, are among the oldest and most widespread of all occult emblems as you can read in The Golden Bough by Sir James George Frazer. Our Yule log probably originated in a similar way, although the word itself comes to us from the Frisian 'Jul', meaning year. Yule logs—originally an entire tree—were burned throughout the 12 days of Christmas to symbolise the return of the Sun, and the lengthening of days after the Winter Solstice.

I know you're all dying to know about Santa, or 'Father Christmas' as he is better known in England. Sadly, I've run out of room so you'll have to look him up yourselves if you want to know his origins and how he came to be so prominently associated with Christmas. Actually, that bit is easy to explain, for Santa is derived from Saint Nicholas, a 4th century Christian bishop, who was famous for his generous gifts to the poor, in particular (so Wikipedia tells me) for presenting the impoverished daughters of a pious Christian with dowries so that they would not have to become prostitutes! So perhaps my fictional Vicar was not so very far wrong in giving pride of place in her Nativity exhibition to Mary Magdalene!

Whatever your own beliefs and however you celebrate Christmas, or even if you don't celebrate it at all, I hope my story and this short afterword has made you smile and given you something to think about over the holidays.