Wisdom of Egypt

In this peroration to our main article we examine the Teaching of Amen-em-apt, one of the best examples of the Wisdom literature of ancient Egypt. These teachings contain much practical advice for attaining Inner Peace that is as relevant today as when it was written, many thousands of years ago
The exact date when Amen-em-apt flourished is not known, but it seems highly probable that it was during the first half of the 18th Dynasty, roughly 3,600 years ago. We can say with some degree of confidence that these and similar teachings formed an important part of the curriculum of the Mystery Schools of ancient Egypt. It was by studying and meditating upon such axioms that the students in these schools learned how to apply the great Truths of Life for the benefit of themselves and others, and this is also the reason we are sharing them with you.

Our version of these teachings is based on the translation and transliteration of the hieroglyphic text in the British Museum papyrus No. 10474 made by E A Wallis Budge in 1924. This differs in several particulars from the versions to be found online and in later books on the wisdom literature of ancient Egypt, which in the main fail to convey the meaning of the original.

Silence and the silent man or woman were regarded with great importance in ancient Egypt. Amen-em-apt repeatedly emphasises the word "Ger Maa" for which we have no exact equivalent. Ger means 'silent one' and Maa 'true' or 'real', so we may take it to mean 'the true silent one'. Again and again these teachings emphasise the fact that "a man who is truly religious knows how to hold his peace." We are also told that: "The boat of the silent one sails along with fair winds," and "Fill thyself full with silence and thou shalt find life."

Budge thought that the idea of silence and repose which underlies the word Ger also meant obedience and submission to the guidance of God, and we agree. Budge also points out that this doctrine finds its exact counterpart in the Islam preached by Mohammed two thousand years later. The fundamental idea of that Religion, like much else, came out of Egypt.

Let us now sit at the feet of Amen-em-apt and see what good things he has to tell us.

"The noisy, hot-headed man is like a large leafy tree planted in stony ground. Its leaves wither and its unripe fruit is lost. When its end has come it is cast into the water, and carried far from its place. The flame of fire is its shroud."
"But the true silent man is like a large leafy tree planted in fertile ground. It blossoms, it doubles its yield of fruit in the summer. It has its place before the face of its Lord. Its foliage is sweet and its shadow pleasant and at the end it is carried into the groves of God."
Note the difference between the 'noisy, hot-headed man' and the 'true silent one.' Note further the words 'blossoms' (gaining knowledge, which is ever-increasing), 'sweet foliage' (what can be more wholesome than wisdom?), 'pleasant' (is it not pleasant to hear the words of the wise?), and 'the groves of God'. The reward of the wise is to enter the 'Fields of Peace' known to the ancient Egyptians as 'Sekhet-Hetepet' or 'Aaru'. The 'Lord' referred to, is of course, our ever-watchful Soul, not any earthly ruler as some ignorant commentators have suggested.

Amen-em-apt exhorts us to treat our fellow-men and women, of every class, with kindness and consideration; to have pity on the widow and orphan, to show charity to the destitute and to help the man who is in need, trouble or adversity. We find many of these moral precepts repeated in the Bible thousands of years later, sometimes almost word-for-word. Does that mean that Proverbs and other Biblical books of maxims were copied from ancient Egypt? Possibly, but this forms no part of our present discussion, nor does it matter very much. We feel sure you will agree that it is enough that we have these wonderful writings and can profit from the wisdom they contain.

Amen-em-apt was most outspoken when discussing the attributes of God, in one instance he says:

"Ask not why God allows evil to exist whilst thou thyself are doing thy utmost to stir up strife. If anything evil belonged to God He would stamp it with the seal of His finger. Likewise there is no goodness in the hand of God because there is no evil before Him."
"Say not 'Today is even as tomorrow'. Tomorrow has yet to come, today has yet to pass away."
"Better is the beggar who is in the hand of God than the rich who are safely housed in a comfortable dwelling."
"Help the sinner, set him upon his feet and commit him to the hand of God."
"Better are cakes made from flour and water with a loving heart than rich meats that carry with them bickering and quarrelling."
"Pass not thy day in eating and drinking or thou wilt become a mere mass of food."
"Better the six feet of land which God gives thee than thirty-thousand gotten by fraud."
Now follows a pearl of advice 'Black Friday' shoppers might profit from, showing that humanity does not change very much in a few thousand years, if at all!

"Never rush forth to gain an advantage, but on the other hand do not create the circumstances that will cause you to lose it."
This is a perfect example of balance.

"If thou sailest with a thief thou wilt be left stranded."
"Accept not the gifts of the rich man if in return thou art required to commit an act of wrong against a poor man."
"Do not argue with a hot-headed man. Let him speak and he will empty his belly before thee (i.e. he will reveal his mind). Then thou shalt know his true character and how best to deal with him."
Would-be politicians take note!

"Let the evil doer alone, he will destroy himself."
"Whether thou hearest what is good or what is bad, treat the report as no affair of thine and hearken not to it. If thou must talk I beseech thee to tell people only what is good upon the earth and as for the reports of evil, hide them in the depths of thy heart."
We feel sure you will agree that if we all practised this last piece of advice there would be much more happiness and less sorrow in the world than is the case today. We may also conclude from this that 'the power of positive thinking' was well-known to the ancient Egyptians, long before it was adopted by modern psychologists. Then such truths were freely available to all, today they are packaged into 'self-empowerment' courses which you can sell for a profit! If this proves nothing else it proves that WE are not very good at business; which is our loss and your gain!

"Do not hanker after riches, fine apparel and luxury. Fortune and Destiny are not blind and provide the needs of the deserving who are in the hand of God."
This is very similar to the Biblical injunction in Matthew 6:28-34: "And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these."

"Do not converse on the things of God in the company of evil men."
"Do not mock an afflicted man by repeating to him the calumnies of those who have wronged him."
"Seat thyself for safety on the two arms of God and incline thine ear to His Wisdom."
With this last piece of good advice, we must reluctantly bid farewell to Amen-em-apt, and trust that his teachings have been as profitable for you to read as they have been enjoyable for us to transcribe.